you don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of the
adventures of tom sawyer  but that ain't no matter   that book was made
by mr  mark twain  and he told the truth  mainly   there was things which
he stretched  but mainly he told the truth   that is nothing   i never
seen anybody but lied one time or another  without it was aunt polly  or
the widow  or maybe mary   aunt polly tom's aunt polly  she is and
mary  and the widow douglas is all told about in that book  which is
mostly a true book  with some stretchers  as i said before 

now the way that the book winds up is this   tom and me found the money
that the robbers hid in the cave  and it made us rich   we got six
thousand dollars apiece all gold   it was an awful sight of money when
it was piled up   well  judge thatcher he took it and put it out at
interest  and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year round
 more than a body could tell what to do with   the widow douglas she took
me for her son  and allowed she would sivilize me  but it was rough
living in the house all the time  considering how dismal regular and
decent the widow was in all her ways  and so when i couldn't stand it no
longer i lit out   i got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead again 
and was free and satisfied   but tom sawyer he hunted me up and said he
was going to start a band of robbers  and i might join if i would go back
to the widow and be respectable   so i went back 

the widow she cried over me  and called me a poor lost lamb  and she
called me a lot of other names  too  but she never meant no harm by it 
she put me in them new clothes again  and i couldn't do nothing but sweat
and sweat  and feel all cramped up   well  then  the old thing commenced
again   the widow rung a bell for supper  and you had to come to time 
when you got to the table you couldn't go right to eating  but you had to
wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a little over the
victuals  though there warn't really anything the matter with them  that
is  nothing only everything was cooked by itself   in a barrel of odds
and ends it is different  things get mixed up  and the juice kind of
swaps around  and the things go better 

after supper she got out her book and learned me about moses and the
bulrushers  and i was in a sweat to find out all about him  but by and by
she let it out that moses had been dead a considerable long time  so then
i didn't care no more about him  because i don't take no stock in dead
people 

pretty soon i wanted to smoke  and asked the widow to let me   but she
wouldn't   she said it was a mean practice and wasn't clean  and i must
try to not do it any more   that is just the way with some people   they
get down on a thing when they don't know nothing about it   here she was
a-bothering about moses  which was no kin to her  and no use to anybody 
being gone  you see  yet finding a power of fault with me for doing a
thing that had some good in it   and she took snuff  too  of course that
was all right  because she done it herself 

her sister  miss watson  a tolerable slim old maid  with goggles on 
had just come to live with her  and took a set at me now with a
spelling-book  she worked me middling hard for about an hour  and then
the widow made her ease up   i couldn't stood it much longer   then for
an hour it was deadly dull  and i was fidgety   miss watson would say 
 don't put your feet up there  huckleberry   and  don't scrunch up like
that  huckleberry set up straight   and pretty soon she would say 
 don't gap and stretch like that  huckleberry why don't you try to
behave    then she told me all about the bad place  and i said i wished i
was there  she got mad then  but i didn't mean no harm   all i wanted was
to go somewheres  all i wanted was a change  i warn't particular   she
said it was wicked to say what i said  said she wouldn't say it for the
whole world  she was going to live so as to go to the good place   well 
i couldn't see no advantage in going where she was going  so i made up my
mind i wouldn't try for it   but i never said so  because it would only
make trouble  and wouldn't do no good 

now she had got a start  and she went on and told me all about the good
place   she said all a body would have to do there was to go around all
day long with a harp and sing  forever and ever   so i didn't think much
of it  but i never said so   i asked her if she reckoned tom sawyer would
go there  and she said not by a considerable sight   i was glad about
that  because i wanted him and me to be together 

miss watson she kept pecking at me  and it got tiresome and lonesome   by
and by they fetched the niggers in and had prayers  and then everybody
was off to bed   i went up to my room with a piece of candle  and put it
on the table   then i set down in a chair by the window and tried to
think of something cheerful  but it warn't no use   i felt so lonesome i
most wished i was dead   the stars were shining  and the leaves rustled
in the woods ever so mournful  and i heard an owl  away off  who-whooing
about somebody that was dead  and a whippowill and a dog crying about
somebody that was going to die  and the wind was trying to whisper
something to me  and i couldn't make out what it was  and so it made the
cold shivers run over me  then away out in the woods i heard that kind of
a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about something that's
on its mind and can't make itself understood  and so can't rest easy in
its grave  and has to go about that way every night grieving   i got so
down-hearted and scared i did wish i had some company   pretty soon a
spider went crawling up my shoulder  and i flipped it off and it lit in
the candle  and before i could budge it was all shriveled up   i didn't
need anybody to tell me that that was an awful bad sign and would fetch
me some bad luck  so i was scared and most shook the clothes off of me 
i got up and turned around in my tracks three times and crossed my breast
every time  and then i tied up a little lock of my hair with a thread to
keep witches away   but i hadn't no confidence   you do that when you've
lost a horseshoe that you've found  instead of nailing it up over the
door  but i hadn't ever heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad
luck when you'd killed a spider 

i set down again  a-shaking all over  and got out my pipe for a smoke 
for the house was all as still as death now  and so the widow wouldn't
know  well  after a long time i heard the clock away off in the town go
boom boom boom twelve licks  and all still again stiller than ever 
pretty soon i heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the trees
 something was a stirring   i set still and listened   directly i could
just barely hear a  me-yow! me-yow!  down there   that was good!  says i 
 me-yow! me-yow!  as soft as i could  and then i put out the light and
scrambled out of the window on to the shed   then i slipped down to the
ground and crawled in among the trees  and  sure enough  there was tom
sawyer waiting for me 




we went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of
the widow's garden  stooping down so as the branches wouldn't scrape our
heads  when we was passing by the kitchen i fell over a root and made a
noise   we scrouched down and laid still   miss watson's big nigger 
named jim  was setting in the kitchen door  we could see him pretty
clear  because there was a light behind him   he got up and stretched his
neck out about a minute  listening   then he says 

 who dah  

he listened some more  then he come tiptoeing down and stood right
between us  we could a touched him  nearly   well  likely it was minutes
and minutes that there warn't a sound  and we all there so close
together   there was a place on my ankle that got to itching  but i
dasn't scratch it  and then my ear begun to itch  and next my back  right
between my shoulders   seemed like i'd die if i couldn't scratch   well 
i've noticed that thing plenty times since   if you are with the quality 
or at a funeral  or trying to go to sleep when you ain't sleepy if you
are anywheres where it won't do for you to scratch  why you will itch all
over in upwards of a thousand places  pretty soon jim says 

 say  who is you   whar is you   dog my cats ef i didn' hear sumf'n 
well  i know what i's gwyne to do   i's gwyne to set down here and listen
tell i hears it agin  

so he set down on the ground betwixt me and tom   he leaned his back up
against a tree  and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched
one of mine   my nose begun to itch   it itched till the tears come into
my eyes   but i dasn't scratch   then it begun to itch on the inside 
next i got to itching underneath   i didn't know how i was going to set
still  this miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes  but it
seemed a sight longer than that   i was itching in eleven different
places now   i reckoned i couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer  but i
set my teeth hard and got ready to try   just then jim begun to breathe
heavy  next he begun to snore and then i was pretty soon comfortable
again 

tom he made a sign to me kind of a little noise with his mouth and we
went creeping away on our hands and knees   when we was ten foot off tom
whispered to me  and wanted to tie jim to the tree for fun   but i said
no  he might wake and make a disturbance  and then they'd find out i
warn't in  then tom said he hadn't got candles enough  and he would slip
in the kitchen and get some more   i didn't want him to try   i said jim
might wake up and come   but tom wanted to resk it  so we slid in there
and got three candles  and tom laid five cents on the table for pay 
then we got out  and i was in a sweat to get away  but nothing would do
tom but he must crawl to where jim was  on his hands and knees  and play
something on him   i waited  and it seemed a good while  everything was
so still and lonesome 

as soon as tom was back we cut along the path  around the garden fence 
and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of
the house   tom said he slipped jim's hat off of his head and hung it on
a limb right over him  and jim stirred a little  but he didn't wake 
afterwards jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance 
and rode him all over the state  and then set him under the trees again 
and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it   and next time jim told
it he said they rode him down to new orleans  and  after that  every time
he told it he spread it more and more  till by and by he said they rode
him all over the world  and tired him most to death  and his back was all
over saddle-boils   jim was monstrous proud about it  and he got so he
wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers   niggers would come miles to
hear jim tell about it  and he was more looked up to than any nigger in
that country   strange niggers would stand with their mouths open and
look him all over  same as if he was a wonder   niggers is always talking
about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire  but whenever one was
talking and letting on to know all about such things  jim would happen in
and say   hm!  what you know 'bout witches   and that nigger was corked
up and had to take a back seat   jim always kept that five-center piece
round his neck with a string  and said it was a charm the devil give to
him with his own hands  and told him he could cure anybody with it and
fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by saying something to it  but
he never told what it was he said to it   niggers would come from all
around there and give jim anything they had  just for a sight of that
five-center piece  but they wouldn't touch it  because the devil had had
his hands on it   jim was most ruined for a servant  because he got stuck
up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches 

well  when tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down
into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling  where
there was sick folks  maybe  and the stars over us was sparkling ever so
fine  and down by the village was the river  a whole mile broad  and
awful still and grand   we went down the hill and found jo harper and ben
rogers  and two or three more of the boys  hid in the old tanyard   so we
unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half  to the
big scar on the hillside  and went ashore 

we went to a clump of bushes  and tom made everybody swear to keep the
secret  and then showed them a hole in the hill  right in the thickest
part of the bushes   then we lit the candles  and crawled in on our hands
and knees   we went about two hundred yards  and then the cave opened up 
tom poked about amongst the passages  and pretty soon ducked under a wall
where you wouldn't a noticed that there was a hole   we went along a
narrow place and got into a kind of room  all damp and sweaty and cold 
and there we stopped   tom says 

 now  we'll start this band of robbers and call it tom sawyer's gang 
everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath  and write his name
in blood  

everybody was willing   so tom got out a sheet of paper that he had wrote
the oath on  and read it   it swore every boy to stick to the band  and
never tell any of the secrets  and if anybody done anything to any boy in
the band  whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and his family
must do it  and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he had killed
them and hacked a cross in their breasts  which was the sign of the band 
and nobody that didn't belong to the band could use that mark  and if he
did he must be sued  and if he done it again he must be killed   and if
anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets  he must have his
throat cut  and then have his carcass burnt up and the ashes scattered
all around  and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never
mentioned again by the gang  but have a curse put on it and be forgot
forever 

everybody said it was a real beautiful oath  and asked tom if he got it
out of his own head   he said  some of it  but the rest was out of
pirate-books and robber-books  and every gang that was high-toned had it 

some thought it would be good to kill the families of boys that told the
secrets   tom said it was a good idea  so he took a pencil and wrote it
in  then ben rogers says 

 here's huck finn  he hain't got no family  what you going to do 'bout
him  

 well  hain't he got a father   says tom sawyer 

 yes  he's got a father  but you can't never find him these days   he
used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard  but he hain't been seen
in these parts for a year or more  

they talked it over  and they was going to rule me out  because they said
every boy must have a family or somebody to kill  or else it wouldn't be
fair and square for the others   well  nobody could think of anything to
do everybody was stumped  and set still   i was most ready to cry  but
all at once i thought of a way  and so i offered them miss watson they
could kill her   everybody said 

 oh  she'll do   that's all right   huck can come in  

then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to sign with  and
i made my mark on the paper 

 now   says ben rogers   what's the line of business of this gang  

 nothing only robbery and murder   tom said 

 but who are we going to rob  houses  or cattle  or  

 stuff! stealing cattle and such things ain't robbery  it's burglary  
says tom sawyer    we ain't burglars   that ain't no sort of style   we
are highwaymen   we stop stages and carriages on the road  with masks on 
and kill the people and take their watches and money  

 must we always kill the people  

 oh  certainly   it's best   some authorities think different  but mostly
it's considered best to kill them except some that you bring to the cave
here  and keep them till they're ransomed  

 ransomed   what's that  

 i don't know   but that's what they do   i've seen it in books  and so
of course that's what we've got to do  

 but how can we do it if we don't know what it is  

 why  blame it all  we've got to do it   don't i tell you it's in the
books   do you want to go to doing different from what's in the books 
and get things all muddled up  

 oh  that's all very fine to say  tom sawyer  but how in the nation are
these fellows going to be ransomed if we don't know how to do it to them 
 that's the thing i want to get at   now  what do you reckon it is  

 well  i don't know   but per'aps if we keep them till they're ransomed 
it means that we keep them till they're dead  

 now  that's something like   that'll answer   why couldn't you said that
before   we'll keep them till they're ransomed to death  and a bothersome
lot they'll be  too eating up everything  and always trying to get
loose  

 how you talk  ben rogers   how can they get loose when there's a guard
over them  ready to shoot them down if they move a peg  

 a guard!  well  that is good   so somebody's got to set up all night and
never get any sleep  just so as to watch them   i think that's
foolishness  why can't a body take a club and ransom them as soon as they
get here  

 because it ain't in the books so that's why   now  ben rogers  do you
want to do things regular  or don't you  that's the idea   don't you
reckon that the people that made the books knows what's the correct thing
to do   do you reckon you can learn 'em anything   not by a good deal 
no  sir  we'll just go on and ransom them in the regular way  

 all right   i don't mind  but i say it's a fool way  anyhow   say  do we
kill the women  too  

 well  ben rogers  if i was as ignorant as you i wouldn't let on   kill
the women   no  nobody ever saw anything in the books like that   you
fetch them to the cave  and you're always as polite as pie to them  and
by and by they fall in love with you  and never want to go home any
more  

 well  if that's the way i'm agreed  but i don't take no stock in it 
mighty soon we'll have the cave so cluttered up with women  and fellows
waiting to be ransomed  that there won't be no place for the robbers 
but go ahead  i ain't got nothing to say  

little tommy barnes was asleep now  and when they waked him up he was
scared  and cried  and said he wanted to go home to his ma  and didn't
want to be a robber any more 

so they all made fun of him  and called him cry-baby  and that made him
mad  and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets   but tom
give him five cents to keep quiet  and said we would all go home and meet
next week  and rob somebody and kill some people 

ben rogers said he couldn't get out much  only sundays  and so he wanted
to begin next sunday  but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it
on sunday  and that settled the thing   they agreed to get together and
fix a day as soon as they could  and then we elected tom sawyer first
captain and jo harper second captain of the gang  and so started home 

i clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was
breaking  my new clothes was all greased up and clayey  and i was
dog-tired 




well  i got a good going-over in the morning from old miss watson on
account of my clothes  but the widow she didn't scold  but only cleaned
off the grease and clay  and looked so sorry that i thought i would
behave awhile if i could   then miss watson she took me in the closet and
prayed  but nothing come of it   she told me to pray every day  and
whatever i asked for i would get it   but it warn't so   i tried it 
once i got a fish-line  but no hooks   it warn't any good to me without
hooks   i tried for the hooks three or four times  but somehow i couldn't
make it work   by and by  one day  i asked miss watson to try for me  but
she said i was a fool   she never told me why  and i couldn't make it out
no way 

i set down one time back in the woods  and had a long think about it   i
says to myself  if a body can get anything they pray for  why don't
deacon winn get back the money he lost on pork   why can't the widow get
back her silver snuffbox that was stole   why can't miss watson fat up 
no  says i to my self  there ain't nothing in it   i went and told the
widow about it  and she said the thing a body could get by praying for it
was  spiritual gifts    this was too many for me  but she told me what
she meant i must help other people  and do everything i could for other
people  and look out for them all the time  and never think about myself 
this was including miss watson  as i took it   i went out in the woods
and turned it over in my mind a long time  but i couldn't see no
advantage about it except for the other people  so at last i reckoned i
wouldn't worry about it any more  but just let it go   sometimes the
widow would take me one side and talk about providence in a way to make a
body's mouth water  but maybe next day miss watson would take hold and
knock it all down again   i judged i could see that there was two
providences  and a poor chap would stand considerable show with the
widow's providence  but if miss watson's got him there warn't no help for
him any more   i thought it all out  and reckoned i would belong to the
widow's if he wanted me  though i couldn't make out how he was a-going to
be any better off then than what he was before  seeing i was so ignorant 
and so kind of low-down and ornery 

pap he hadn't been seen for more than a year  and that was comfortable
for me  i didn't want to see him no more   he used to always whale me
when he was sober and could get his hands on me  though i used to take to
the woods most of the time when he was around   well  about this time he
was found in the river drownded  about twelve mile above town  so people
said   they judged it was him  anyway  said this drownded man was just
his size  and was ragged  and had uncommon long hair  which was all like
pap  but they couldn't make nothing out of the face  because it had been
in the water so long it warn't much like a face at all   they said he was
floating on his back in the water   they took him and buried him on the
bank   but i warn't comfortable long  because i happened to think of
something   i knowed mighty well that a drownded man don't float on his
back  but on his face   so i knowed  then  that this warn't pap  but a
woman dressed up in a man's clothes   so i was uncomfortable again   i
judged the old man would turn up again by and by  though i wished he
wouldn't 

we played robber now and then about a month  and then i resigned   all
the boys did   we hadn't robbed nobody  hadn't killed any people  but
only just pretended   we used to hop out of the woods and go charging
down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market  but
we never hived any of them   tom sawyer called the hogs  ingots   and he
called the turnips and stuff  julery   and we would go to the cave and
powwow over what we had done  and how many people we had killed and
marked   but i couldn't see no profit in it   one time tom sent a boy to
run about town with a blazing stick  which he called a slogan (which was
the sign for the gang to get together)  and then he said he had got
secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of spanish
merchants and rich a-rabs was going to camp in cave hollow with two
hundred elephants  and six hundred camels  and over a thousand  sumter 
mules  all loaded down with di'monds  and they didn't have only a guard
of four hundred soldiers  and so we would lay in ambuscade  as he called
it  and kill the lot and scoop the things   he said we must slick up our
swords and guns  and get ready   he never could go after even a
turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it 
though they was only lath and broomsticks  and you might scour at them
till you rotted  and then they warn't worth a mouthful of ashes more than
what they was before   i didn't believe we could lick such a crowd of
spaniards and a-rabs  but i wanted to see the camels and elephants  so i
was on hand next day  saturday  in the ambuscade  and when we got the
word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill   but there warn't no
spaniards and a-rabs  and there warn't no camels nor no elephants   it
warn't anything but a sunday-school picnic  and only a primer-class at
that   we busted it up  and chased the children up the hollow  but we
never got anything but some doughnuts and jam  though ben rogers got a
rag doll  and jo harper got a hymn-book and a tract  and then the teacher
charged in  and made us drop everything and cut   i didn't see no
di'monds  and i told tom sawyer so   he said there was loads of them
there  anyway  and he said there was a-rabs there  too  and elephants and
things   i said  why couldn't we see them  then   he said if i warn't so
ignorant  but had read a book called don quixote  i would know without
asking   he said it was all done by enchantment   he said there was
hundreds of soldiers there  and elephants and treasure  and so on  but we
had enemies which he called magicians  and they had turned the whole
thing into an infant sunday-school  just out of spite   i said  all
right  then the thing for us to do was to go for the magicians   tom
sawyer said i was a numskull 

 why   said he   a magician could call up a lot of genies  and they would
hash you up like nothing before you could say jack robinson   they are as
tall as a tree and as big around as a church  

 well   i says   s'pose we got some genies to help us can't we lick the
other crowd then  

 how you going to get them  

 i don't know   how do they get them  

 why  they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring  and then the genies come
tearing in  with the thunder and lightning a-ripping around and the smoke
a-rolling  and everything they're told to do they up and do it   they
don't think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots  and belting
a sunday-school superintendent over the head with it or any other man  

 who makes them tear around so  

 why  whoever rubs the lamp or the ring   they belong to whoever rubs the
lamp or the ring  and they've got to do whatever he says   if he tells
them to build a palace forty miles long out of di'monds  and fill it full
of chewing-gum  or whatever you want  and fetch an emperor's daughter
from china for you to marry  they've got to do it and they've got to do
it before sun-up next morning  too   and more   they've got to waltz that
palace around over the country wherever you want it  you understand  

 well   says i   i think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping
the palace themselves 'stead of fooling them away like that   and what's
more if i was one of them i would see a man in jericho before i would
drop my business and come to him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp  

 how you talk  huck finn   why  you'd have to come when he rubbed it 
whether you wanted to or not  

 what! and i as high as a tree and as big as a church   all right  then 
i would come  but i lay i'd make that man climb the highest tree there
was in the country  

 shucks  it ain't no use to talk to you  huck finn   you don't seem to
know anything  somehow perfect saphead  

i thought all this over for two or three days  and then i reckoned i
would see if there was anything in it   i got an old tin lamp and an iron
ring  and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till i sweat like
an injun  calculating to build a palace and sell it  but it warn't no
use  none of the genies come   so then i judged that all that stuff was
only just one of tom sawyer's lies   i reckoned he believed in the a-rabs
and the elephants  but as for me i think different   it had all the marks
of a sunday-school 




well  three or four months run along  and it was well into the winter
now  i had been to school most all the time and could spell and read and
write just a little  and could say the multiplication table up to six
times seven is thirty-five  and i don't reckon i could ever get any
further than that if i was to live forever   i don't take no stock in
mathematics  anyway 

at first i hated the school  but by and by i got so i could stand it 
whenever i got uncommon tired i played hookey  and the hiding i got next
day done me good and cheered me up   so the longer i went to school the
easier it got to be   i was getting sort of used to the widow's ways 
too  and they warn't so raspy on me   living in a house and sleeping in a
bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly  but before the cold weather i used
to slide out and sleep in the woods sometimes  and so that was a rest to
me   i liked the old ways best  but i was getting so i liked the new
ones  too  a little bit  the widow said i was coming along slow but sure 
and doing very satisfactory   she said she warn't ashamed of me 

one morning i happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast   i
reached for some of it as quick as i could to throw over my left shoulder
and keep off the bad luck  but miss watson was in ahead of me  and
crossed me off  she says   take your hands away  huckleberry  what a mess
you are always making!   the widow put in a good word for me  but that
warn't going to keep off the bad luck  i knowed that well enough   i
started out  after breakfast  feeling worried and shaky  and wondering
where it was going to fall on me  and what it was going to be   there is
ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck  but this wasn't one of them
kind  so i never tried to do anything  but just poked along low-spirited
and on the watch-out 

i went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go
through the high board fence   there was an inch of new snow on the
ground  and i seen somebody's tracks   they had come up from the quarry
and stood around the stile a while  and then went on around the garden
fence   it was funny they hadn't come in  after standing around so   i
couldn't make it out   it was very curious  somehow   i was going to
follow around  but i stooped down to look at the tracks first   i didn't
notice anything at first  but next i did   there was a cross in the left
boot-heel made with big nails  to keep off the devil 

i was up in a second and shinning down the hill   i looked over my
shoulder every now and then  but i didn't see nobody   i was at judge
thatcher's as quick as i could get there   he said 

 why  my boy  you are all out of breath   did you come for your
interest  

 no  sir   i says   is there some for me  

 oh  yes  a half-yearly is in last night over a hundred and fifty
dollars   quite a fortune for you   you had better let me invest it along
with your six thousand  because if you take it you'll spend it  

 no  sir   i says   i don't want to spend it   i don't want it at all
 nor the six thousand  nuther   i want you to take it  i want to give it
to you the six thousand and all  

he looked surprised   he couldn't seem to make it out   he says 

 why  what can you mean  my boy  

i says   don't you ask me no questions about it  please   you'll take it
 won't you  

he says 

 well  i'm puzzled   is something the matter  

 please take it   says i   and don't ask me nothing then i won't have to
tell no lies  

he studied a while  and then he says 

 oho-o!  i think i see   you want to sell all your property to me not
give it   that's the correct idea  

then he wrote something on a paper and read it over  and says 

 there  you see it says 'for a consideration '  that means i have bought
it of you and paid you for it   here's a dollar for you   now you sign
it  

so i signed it  and left 

miss watson's nigger  jim  had a hair-ball as big as your fist  which had
been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox  and he used to do magic
with it   he said there was a spirit inside of it  and it knowed
everything   so i went to him that night and told him pap was here again 
for i found his tracks in the snow   what i wanted to know was  what he
was going to do  and was he going to stay   jim got out his hair-ball and
said something over it  and then he held it up and dropped it on the
floor   it fell pretty solid  and only rolled about an inch   jim tried
it again  and then another time  and it acted just the same   jim got
down on his knees  and put his ear against it and listened   but it
warn't no use  he said it wouldn't talk  he said sometimes it wouldn't
talk without money   i told him i had an old slick counterfeit quarter
that warn't no good because the brass showed through the silver a little 
and it wouldn't pass nohow  even if the brass didn't show  because it was
so slick it felt greasy  and so that would tell on it every time   (i
reckoned i wouldn't say nothing about the dollar i got from the judge ) i
said it was pretty bad money  but maybe the hair-ball would take it 
because maybe it wouldn't know the difference   jim smelt it and bit it
and rubbed it  and said he would manage so the hair-ball would think it
was good   he said he would split open a raw irish potato and stick the
quarter in between and keep it there all night  and next morning you
couldn't see no brass  and it wouldn't feel greasy no more  and so
anybody in town would take it in a minute  let alone a hair-ball   well 
i knowed a potato would do that before  but i had forgot it 

jim put the quarter under the hair-ball  and got down and listened again 
this time he said the hair-ball was all right   he said it would tell my
whole fortune if i wanted it to   i says  go on   so the hair-ball talked
to jim  and jim told it to me   he says 

 yo' ole father doan' know yit what he's a-gwyne to do   sometimes he
spec he'll go 'way  en den agin he spec he'll stay   de bes' way is to
res' easy en let de ole man take his own way   dey's two angels hoverin'
roun' 'bout him   one uv 'em is white en shiny  en t'other one is black 
de white one gits him to go right a little while  den de black one sail
in en bust it all up   a body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch him
at de las'   but you is all right   you gwyne to have considable trouble
in yo' life  en considable joy   sometimes you gwyne to git hurt  en
sometimes you gwyne to git sick  but every time you's gwyne to git well
agin   dey's two gals flyin' 'bout you in yo' life   one uv 'em's light
en t'other one is dark  one is rich en t'other is po'   you's gwyne to
marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by   you wants to keep 'way
fum de water as much as you kin  en don't run no resk  'kase it's down in
de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung  

when i lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap his
own self!




i had shut the door to   then i turned around and there he was   i used
to be scared of him all the time  he tanned me so much   i reckoned i was
scared now  too  but in a minute i see i was mistaken that is  after the
first jolt  as you may say  when my breath sort of hitched  he being so
unexpected  but right away after i see i warn't scared of him worth
bothring about 

he was most fifty  and he looked it   his hair was long and tangled and
greasy  and hung down  and you could see his eyes shining through like he
was behind vines   it was all black  no gray  so was his long  mixed-up
whiskers   there warn't no color in his face  where his face showed  it
was white  not like another man's white  but a white to make a body sick 
a white to make a body's flesh crawl a tree-toad white  a fish-belly
white   as for his clothes just rags  that was all   he had one ankle
resting on t'other knee  the boot on that foot was busted  and two of his
toes stuck through  and he worked them now and then   his hat was laying
on the floor an old black slouch with the top caved in  like a lid 

i stood a-looking at him  he set there a-looking at me  with his chair
tilted back a little   i set the candle down   i noticed the window was
up  so he had clumb in by the shed   he kept a-looking me all over   by
and by he says 

 starchy clothes very   you think you're a good deal of a big-bug  don't
you  

 maybe i am  maybe i ain't   i says 

 don't you give me none o' your lip   says he    you've put on
considerable many frills since i been away   i'll take you down a peg
before i get done with you   you're educated  too  they say can read and
write   you think you're better'n your father  now  don't you  because he
can't   i'll take it out of you   who told you you might meddle with such
hifalut'n foolishness  hey  who told you you could  

 the widow   she told me  

 the widow  hey  and who told the widow she could put in her shovel
about a thing that ain't none of her business  

 nobody never told her  

 well  i'll learn her how to meddle   and looky here you drop that
school  you hear   i'll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs
over his own father and let on to be better'n what he is   you lemme
catch you fooling around that school again  you hear   your mother
couldn't read  and she couldn't write  nuther  before she died   none of
the family couldn't before they died   i can't  and here you're
a-swelling yourself up like this   i ain't the man to stand it you hear 
say  lemme hear you read  

i took up a book and begun something about general washington and the
wars  when i'd read about a half a minute  he fetched the book a whack
with his hand and knocked it across the house   he says 

 it's so   you can do it   i had my doubts when you told me   now looky
here  you stop that putting on frills   i won't have it   i'll lay for
you  my smarty  and if i catch you about that school i'll tan you good 
first you know you'll get religion  too   i never see such a son  

he took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and a boy  and
says 

 what's this  

 it's something they give me for learning my lessons good  

he tore it up  and says 

 i'll give you something better i'll give you a cowhide  

he set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute  and then he says 

 ain't you a sweet-scented dandy  though   a bed  and bedclothes  and a
look'n'-glass  and a piece of carpet on the floor and your own father
got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard   i never see such a son   i
bet i'll take some o' these frills out o' you before i'm done with you 
why  there ain't no end to your airs they say you're rich   hey  how's
that  

 they lie that's how  

 looky here mind how you talk to me  i'm a-standing about all i can
stand now so don't gimme no sass   i've been in town two days  and i
hain't heard nothing but about you bein' rich   i heard about it away
down the river  too   that's why i come   you git me that money
to-morrow i want it  

 i hain't got no money  

 it's a lie   judge thatcher's got it   you git it   i want it  

 i hain't got no money  i tell you   you ask judge thatcher  he'll tell
you the same  

 all right   i'll ask him  and i'll make him pungle  too  or i'll know
the reason why   say  how much you got in your pocket   i want it  

 i hain't got only a dollar  and i want that to  

 it don't make no difference what you want it for you just shell it
out  

he took it and bit it to see if it was good  and then he said he was
going down town to get some whisky  said he hadn't had a drink all day 
when he had got out on the shed he put his head in again  and cussed me
for putting on frills and trying to be better than him  and when i
reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again  and told me
to mind about that school  because he was going to lay for me and lick me
if i didn't drop that 

next day he was drunk  and he went to judge thatcher's and bullyragged
him  and tried to make him give up the money  but he couldn't  and then
he swore he'd make the law force him 

the judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away from
him and let one of them be my guardian  but it was a new judge that had
just come  and he didn't know the old man  so he said courts mustn't
interfere and separate families if they could help it  said he'd druther
not take a child away from its father   so judge thatcher and the widow
had to quit on the business 

that pleased the old man till he couldn't rest   he said he'd cowhide me
till i was black and blue if i didn't raise some money for him   i
borrowed three dollars from judge thatcher  and pap took it and got
drunk  and went a-blowing around and cussing and whooping and carrying
on  and he kept it up all over town  with a tin pan  till most midnight 
then they jailed him  and next day they had him before court  and jailed
him again for a week   but he said he was satisfied  said he was boss of
his son  and he'd make it warm for him 

when he got out the new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him 
so he took him to his own house  and dressed him up clean and nice  and
had him to breakfast and dinner and supper with the family  and was just
old pie to him  so to speak   and after supper he talked to him about
temperance and such things till the old man cried  and said he'd been a
fool  and fooled away his life  but now he was a-going to turn over a new
leaf and be a man nobody wouldn't be ashamed of  and he hoped the judge
would help him and not look down on him   the judge said he could hug him
for them words  so he cried  and his wife she cried again  pap said he'd
been a man that had always been misunderstood before  and the judge said
he believed it   the old man said that what a man wanted that was down
was sympathy  and the judge said it was so  so they cried again   and
when it was bedtime the old man rose up and held out his hand  and says 

 look at it  gentlemen and ladies all  take a-hold of it  shake it 
there's a hand that was the hand of a hog  but it ain't so no more  it's
the hand of a man that's started in on a new life  and'll die before
he'll go back   you mark them words don't forget i said them   it's a
clean hand now  shake it don't be afeard  

so they shook it  one after the other  all around  and cried   the
judge's wife she kissed it   then the old man he signed a pledge made
his mark  the judge said it was the holiest time on record  or something
like that  then they tucked the old man into a beautiful room  which was
the spare room  and in the night some time he got powerful thirsty and
clumb out on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his
new coat for a jug of forty-rod  and clumb back again and had a good old
time  and towards daylight he crawled out again  drunk as a fiddler  and
rolled off the porch and broke his left arm in two places  and was most
froze to death when somebody found him after sun-up   and when they come
to look at that spare room they had to take soundings before they could
navigate it 

the judge he felt kind of sore   he said he reckoned a body could reform
the old man with a shotgun  maybe  but he didn't know no other way 




well  pretty soon the old man was up and around again  and then he went
for judge thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money  and he
went for me  too  for not stopping school   he catched me a couple of
times and thrashed me  but i went to school just the same  and dodged him
or outrun him most of the time   i didn't want to go to school much
before  but i reckoned i'd go now to spite pap   that law trial was a
slow business appeared like they warn't ever going to get started on
it  so every now and then i'd borrow two or three dollars off of the
judge for him  to keep from getting a cowhiding   every time he got money
he got drunk  and every time he got drunk he raised cain around town  and
every time he raised cain he got jailed   he was just suited this kind
of thing was right in his line 

he got to hanging around the widow's too much and so she told him at last
that if he didn't quit using around there she would make trouble for him 
well  wasn't he mad   he said he would show who was huck finn's boss   so
he watched out for me one day in the spring  and catched me  and took me
up the river about three mile in a skiff  and crossed over to the
illinois shore where it was woody and there warn't no houses but an old
log hut in a place where the timber was so thick you couldn't find it if
you didn't know where it was 

he kept me with him all the time  and i never got a chance to run off 
we lived in that old cabin  and he always locked the door and put the key
under his head nights   he had a gun which he had stole  i reckon  and we
fished and hunted  and that was what we lived on   every little while he
locked me in and went down to the store  three miles  to the ferry  and
traded fish and game for whisky  and fetched it home and got drunk and
had a good time  and licked me   the widow she found out where i was by
and by  and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me  but pap drove
him off with the gun  and it warn't long after that till i was used to
being where i was  and liked it all but the cowhide part 

it was kind of lazy and jolly  laying off comfortable all day  smoking
and fishing  and no books nor study   two months or more run along  and
my clothes got to be all rags and dirt  and i didn't see how i'd ever got
to like it so well at the widow's  where you had to wash  and eat on a
plate  and comb up  and go to bed and get up regular  and be forever
bothering over a book  and have old miss watson pecking at you all the
time   i didn't want to go back no more   i had stopped cussing  because
the widow didn't like it  but now i took to it again because pap hadn't
no objections   it was pretty good times up in the woods there  take it
all around 

but by and by pap got too handy with his hick'ry  and i couldn't stand
it  i was all over welts   he got to going away so much  too  and locking
me in   once he locked me in and was gone three days   it was dreadful
lonesome   i judged he had got drowned  and i wasn't ever going to get
out any more   i was scared   i made up my mind i would fix up some way
to leave there   i had tried to get out of that cabin many a time  but i
couldn't find no way   there warn't a window to it big enough for a dog
to get through   i couldn't get up the chimbly  it was too narrow   the
door was thick  solid oak slabs   pap was pretty careful not to leave a
knife or anything in the cabin when he was away  i reckon i had hunted
the place over as much as a hundred times  well  i was most all the time
at it  because it was about the only way to put in the time   but this
time i found something at last  i found an old rusty wood-saw without any
handle  it was laid in between a rafter and the clapboards of the roof 
i greased it up and went to work   there was an old horse-blanket nailed
against the logs at the far end of the cabin behind the table  to keep
the wind from blowing through the chinks and putting the candle out   i
got under the table and raised the blanket  and went to work to saw a
section of the big bottom log out big enough to let me through   well 
it was a good long job  but i was getting towards the end of it when i
heard pap's gun in the woods   i got rid of the signs of my work  and
dropped the blanket and hid my saw  and pretty soon pap come in 

pap warn't in a good humor so he was his natural self   he said he was
down town  and everything was going wrong   his lawyer said he reckoned
he would win his lawsuit and get the money if they ever got started on
the trial  but then there was ways to put it off a long time  and judge
thatcher knowed how to do it   and he said people allowed there'd be
another trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my
guardian  and they guessed it would win this time   this shook me up
considerable  because i didn't want to go back to the widow's any more
and be so cramped up and sivilized  as they called it   then the old man
got to cussing  and cussed everything and everybody he could think of 
and then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn't skipped any 
and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round 
including a considerable parcel of people which he didn't know the names
of  and so called them what's-his-name when he got to them  and went
right along with his cussing 

he said he would like to see the widow get me   he said he would watch
out  and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place
six or seven mile off to stow me in  where they might hunt till they
dropped and they couldn't find me   that made me pretty uneasy again  but
only for a minute  i reckoned i wouldn't stay on hand till he got that
chance 

the old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had got 
there was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal  and a side of bacon 
ammunition  and a four-gallon jug of whisky  and an old book and two
newspapers for wadding  besides some tow   i toted up a load  and went
back and set down on the bow of the skiff to rest   i thought it all
over  and i reckoned i would walk off with the gun and some lines  and
take to the woods when i run away   i guessed i wouldn't stay in one
place  but just tramp right across the country  mostly night times  and
hunt and fish to keep alive  and so get so far away that the old man nor
the widow couldn't ever find me any more   i judged i would saw out and
leave that night if pap got drunk enough  and i reckoned he would   i got
so full of it i didn't notice how long i was staying till the old man
hollered and asked me whether i was asleep or drownded 

i got the things all up to the cabin  and then it was about dark   while
i was cooking supper the old man took a swig or two and got sort of
warmed up  and went to ripping again   he had been drunk over in town 
and laid in the gutter all night  and he was a sight to look at   a body
would a thought he was adam he was just all mud   whenever his liquor
begun to work he most always went for the govment  this time he says 

 call this a govment! why  just look at it and see what it's like 
here's the law a-standing ready to take a man's son away from him a
man's own son  which he has had all the trouble and all the anxiety and
all the expense of raising   yes  just as that man has got that son
raised at last  and ready to go to work and begin to do suthin' for him
and give him a rest  the law up and goes for him   and they call that
govment!  that ain't all  nuther   the law backs that old judge thatcher
up and helps him to keep me out o' my property   here's what the law
does   the law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and up'ards  and
jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this  and lets him go round in
clothes that ain't fitten for a hog  they call that govment!  a man can't
get his rights in a govment like this  sometimes i've a mighty notion to
just leave the country for good and all  yes  and i told 'em so  i told
old thatcher so to his face   lots of 'em heard me  and can tell what i
said   says i  for two cents i'd leave the blamed country and never come
a-near it agin   them's the very words   i says look at my hat if you
call it a hat but the lid raises up and the rest of it goes down till
it's below my chin  and then it ain't rightly a hat at all  but more like
my head was shoved up through a jint o' stove-pipe   look at it  says i
 such a hat for me to wear one of the wealthiest men in this town if i
could git my rights 

 oh  yes  this is a wonderful govment  wonderful   why  looky here 
there was a free nigger there from ohio a mulatter  most as white as a
white man   he had the whitest shirt on you ever see  too  and the
shiniest hat  and there ain't a man in that town that's got as fine
clothes as what he had  and he had a gold watch and chain  and a
silver-headed cane the awfulest old gray-headed nabob in the state   and
what do you think   they said he was a p'fessor in a college  and could
talk all kinds of languages  and knowed everything   and that ain't the
wust  they said he could vote when he was at home   well  that let me
out  thinks i  what is the country a-coming to   it was 'lection day  and
i was just about to go and vote myself if i warn't too drunk to get
there  but when they told me there was a state in this country where
they'd let that nigger vote  i drawed out   i says i'll never vote agin 
them's the very words i said  they all heard me  and the country may rot
for all me i'll never vote agin as long as i live   and to see the cool
way of that nigger why  he wouldn't a give me the road if i hadn't
shoved him out o' the way   i says to the people  why ain't this nigger
put up at auction and sold  that's what i want to know   and what do you
reckon they said  why  they said he couldn't be sold till he'd been in
the state six months  and he hadn't been there that long yet   there 
now that's a specimen   they call that a govment that can't sell a free
nigger till he's been in the state six months   here's a govment that
calls itself a govment  and lets on to be a govment  and thinks it is a
govment  and yet's got to set stock-still for six whole months before it
can take a hold of a prowling  thieving  infernal  white-shirted free
nigger  and  

pap was agoing on so he never noticed where his old limber legs was
taking him to  so he went head over heels over the tub of salt pork and
barked both shins  and the rest of his speech was all the hottest kind of
language mostly hove at the nigger and the govment  though he give the
tub some  too  all along  here and there   he hopped around the cabin
considerable  first on one leg and then on the other  holding first one
shin and then the other one  and at last he let out with his left foot
all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling kick   but it warn't good
judgment  because that was the boot that had a couple of his toes leaking
out of the front end of it  so now he raised a howl that fairly made a
body's hair raise  and down he went in the dirt  and rolled there  and
held his toes  and the cussing he done then laid over anything he had
ever done previous   he said so his own self afterwards   he had heard
old sowberry hagan in his best days  and he said it laid over him  too 
but i reckon that was sort of piling it on  maybe 

after supper pap took the jug  and said he had enough whisky there for
two drunks and one delirium tremens   that was always his word   i judged
he would be blind drunk in about an hour  and then i would steal the key 
or saw myself out  one or t'other   he drank and drank  and tumbled down
on his blankets by and by  but luck didn't run my way   he didn't go
sound asleep  but was uneasy   he groaned and moaned and thrashed around
this way and that for a long time   at last i got so sleepy i couldn't
keep my eyes open all i could do  and so before i knowed what i was about
i was sound asleep  and the candle burning 

i don't know how long i was asleep  but all of a sudden there was an
awful scream and i was up   there was pap looking wild  and skipping
around every which way and yelling about snakes   he said they was
crawling up his legs  and then he would give a jump and scream  and say
one had bit him on the cheek but i couldn't see no snakes   he started
and run round and round the cabin  hollering  take him off! take him off!
he's biting me on the neck!   i never see a man look so wild in the eyes 
pretty soon he was all fagged out  and fell down panting  then he rolled
over and over wonderful fast  kicking things every which way  and
striking and grabbing at the air with his hands  and screaming and saying
there was devils a-hold of him   he wore out by and by  and laid still a
while  moaning   then he laid stiller  and didn't make a sound   i could
hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods  and it seemed
terrible still   he was laying over by the corner  by and by he raised up
part way and listened  with his head to one side   he says  very low 

 tramp tramp tramp  that's the dead  tramp tramp tramp  they're
coming after me  but i won't go   oh  they're here! don't touch me
 don't! hands off they're cold  let go   oh  let a poor devil alone! 

then he went down on all fours and crawled off  begging them to let him
alone  and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under the
old pine table  still a-begging  and then he went to crying   i could
hear him through the blanket 

by and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild  and he
see me and went for me   he chased me round and round the place with a
clasp-knife  calling me the angel of death  and saying he would kill me 
and then i couldn't come for him no more   i begged  and told him i was
only huck  but he laughed such a screechy laugh  and roared and cussed 
and kept on chasing me up   once when i turned short and dodged under his
arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my shoulders  and i
thought i was gone  but i slid out of the jacket quick as lightning  and
saved myself  pretty soon he was all tired out  and dropped down with his
back against the door  and said he would rest a minute and then kill me 
he put his knife under him  and said he would sleep and get strong  and
then he would see who was who 

so he dozed off pretty soon   by and by i got the old split-bottom chair
and clumb up as easy as i could  not to make any noise  and got down the
gun   i slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded  then i
laid it across the turnip barrel  pointing towards pap  and set down
behind it to wait for him to stir   and how slow and still the time did
drag along 




 git up!  what you 'bout  

i opened my eyes and looked around  trying to make out where i was   it
was after sun-up  and i had been sound asleep   pap was standing over me
looking sour and sick  too   he says 

 what you doin' with this gun  

i judged he didn't know nothing about what he had been doing  so i says 

 somebody tried to get in  so i was laying for him  

 why didn't you roust me out  

 well  i tried to  but i couldn't  i couldn't budge you  

 well  all right   don't stand there palavering all day  but out with you
and see if there's a fish on the lines for breakfast   i'll be along in a
minute  

he unlocked the door  and i cleared out up the river-bank   i noticed
some pieces of limbs and such things floating down  and a sprinkling of
bark  so i knowed the river had begun to rise   i reckoned i would have
great times now if i was over at the town   the june rise used to be
always luck for me  because as soon as that rise begins here comes
cordwood floating down  and pieces of log rafts sometimes a dozen logs
together  so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the
wood-yards and the sawmill 

i went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t'other one out for
what the rise might fetch along   well  all at once here comes a canoe 
just a beauty  too  about thirteen or fourteen foot long  riding high
like a duck   i shot head-first off of the bank like a frog  clothes and
all on  and struck out for the canoe   i just expected there'd be
somebody laying down in it  because people often done that to fool folks 
and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they'd raise up and
laugh at him   but it warn't so this time   it was a drift-canoe sure
enough  and i clumb in and paddled her ashore   thinks i  the old man
will be glad when he sees this she's worth ten dollars   but when i
got to shore pap wasn't in sight yet  and as i was running her into a
little creek like a gully  all hung over with vines and willows  i struck
another idea   i judged i'd hide her good  and then  'stead of taking to
the woods when i run off  i'd go down the river about fifty mile and camp
in one place for good  and not have such a rough time tramping on foot 

it was pretty close to the shanty  and i thought i heard the old man
coming all the time  but i got her hid  and then i out and looked around
a bunch of willows  and there was the old man down the path a piece just
drawing a bead on a bird with his gun   so he hadn't seen anything 

when he got along i was hard at it taking up a  trot  line   he abused me
a little for being so slow  but i told him i fell in the river  and that
was what made me so long   i knowed he would see i was wet  and then he
would be asking questions   we got five catfish off the lines and went
home 

while we laid off after breakfast to sleep up  both of us being about
wore out  i got to thinking that if i could fix up some way to keep pap
and the widow from trying to follow me  it would be a certainer thing
than trusting to luck to get far enough off before they missed me  you
see  all kinds of things might happen   well  i didn't see no way for a
while  but by and by pap raised up a minute to drink another barrel of
water  and he says 

 another time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out  you
hear  that man warn't here for no good   i'd a shot him   next time you
roust me out  you hear  

then he dropped down and went to sleep again  but what he had been saying
give me the very idea i wanted   i says to myself  i can fix it now so
nobody won't think of following me 

about twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank   the river
was coming up pretty fast  and lots of driftwood going by on the rise 
by and by along comes part of a log raft nine logs fast together   we
went out with the skiff and towed it ashore   then we had dinner 
anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through  so as to catch
more stuff  but that warn't pap's style   nine logs was enough for one
time  he must shove right over to town and sell   so he locked me in and
took the skiff  and started off towing the raft about half-past three   i
judged he wouldn't come back that night   i waited till i reckoned he had
got a good start  then i out with my saw  and went to work on that log
again   before he was t'other side of the river i was out of the hole 
him and his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder 

i took the sack of corn meal and took it to where the canoe was hid  and
shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in  then i done the same
with the side of bacon  then the whisky-jug   i took all the coffee and
sugar there was  and all the ammunition  i took the wadding  i took the
bucket and gourd  i took a dipper and a tin cup  and my old saw and two
blankets  and the skillet and the coffee-pot   i took fish-lines and
matches and other things everything that was worth a cent   i cleaned
out the place   i wanted an axe  but there wasn't any  only the one out
at the woodpile  and i knowed why i was going to leave that   i fetched
out the gun  and now i was done 

i had wore the ground a good deal crawling out of the hole and dragging
out so many things   so i fixed that as good as i could from the outside
by scattering dust on the place  which covered up the smoothness and the
sawdust   then i fixed the piece of log back into its place  and put two
rocks under it and one against it to hold it there  for it was bent up at
that place and didn't quite touch ground   if you stood four or five foot
away and didn't know it was sawed  you wouldn't never notice it  and
besides  this was the back of the cabin  and it warn't likely anybody
would go fooling around there 

it was all grass clear to the canoe  so i hadn't left a track   i
followed around to see   i stood on the bank and looked out over the
river   all safe   so i took the gun and went up a piece into the woods 
and was hunting around for some birds when i see a wild pig  hogs soon
went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie farms 
i shot this fellow and took him into camp 

i took the axe and smashed in the door   i beat it and hacked it
considerable a-doing it   i fetched the pig in  and took him back nearly
to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe  and laid him down
on the ground to bleed  i say ground because it was ground hard packed 
and no boards   well  next i took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks
in it all i could drag and i started it from the pig  and dragged it
to the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in  and
down it sunk  out of sight   you could easy see that something had been
dragged over the ground   i did wish tom sawyer was there  i knowed he
would take an interest in this kind of business  and throw in the fancy
touches   nobody could spread himself like tom sawyer in such a thing as
that 

well  last i pulled out some of my hair  and blooded the axe good  and
stuck it on the back side  and slung the axe in the corner   then i took
up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn't drip)
till i got a good piece below the house and then dumped him into the
river   now i thought of something else   so i went and got the bag of
meal and my old saw out of the canoe  and fetched them to the house   i
took the bag to where it used to stand  and ripped a hole in the bottom
of it with the saw  for there warn't no knives and forks on the place
 pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cooking   then i
carried the sack about a hundred yards across the grass and through the
willows east of the house  to a shallow lake that was five mile wide and
full of rushes and ducks too  you might say  in the season   there was a
slough or a creek leading out of it on the other side that went miles
away  i don't know where  but it didn't go to the river   the meal sifted
out and made a little track all the way to the lake   i dropped pap's
whetstone there too  so as to look like it had been done by accident 
then i tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string  so it wouldn't
leak no more  and took it and my saw to the canoe again 

it was about dark now  so i dropped the canoe down the river under some
willows that hung over the bank  and waited for the moon to rise   i made
fast to a willow  then i took a bite to eat  and by and by laid down in
the canoe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan   i says to myself  they'll
follow the track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then drag the
river for me   and they'll follow that meal track to the lake and go
browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the robbers that
killed me and took the things   they won't ever hunt the river for
anything but my dead carcass  they'll soon get tired of that  and won't
bother no more about me   all right  i can stop anywhere i want to 
jackson's island is good enough for me  i know that island pretty well 
and nobody ever comes there   and then i can paddle over to town nights 
and slink around and pick up things i want  jackson's island's the place 

i was pretty tired  and the first thing i knowed i was asleep   when i
woke up i didn't know where i was for a minute   i set up and looked
around  a little scared   then i remembered   the river looked miles and
miles across   the moon was so bright i could a counted the drift logs
that went a-slipping along  black and still  hundreds of yards out from
shore  everything was dead quiet  and it looked late  and smelt late 
you know what i mean i don't know the words to put it in 

i took a good gap and a stretch  and was just going to unhitch and start
when i heard a sound away over the water   i listened   pretty soon i
made it out   it was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from
oars working in rowlocks when it's a still night   i peeped out through
the willow branches  and there it was a skiff  away across the water   i
couldn't tell how many was in it   it kept a-coming  and when it was
abreast of me i see there warn't but one man in it   think's i  maybe
it's pap  though i warn't expecting him   he dropped below me with the
current  and by and by he came a-swinging up shore in the easy water  and
he went by so close i could a reached out the gun and touched him   well 
it was pap  sure enough and sober  too  by the way he laid his oars 

i didn't lose no time   the next minute i was a-spinning down stream soft
but quick in the shade of the bank   i made two mile and a half  and then
struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards the middle of the river 
because pretty soon i would be passing the ferry landing  and people
might see me and hail me   i got out amongst the driftwood  and then laid
down in the bottom of the canoe and let her float   i laid there  and had
a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe  looking away into the sky  not a
cloud in it   the sky looks ever so deep when you lay down on your back
in the moonshine  i never knowed it before   and how far a body can hear
on the water such nights!  i heard people talking at the ferry landing 
i heard what they said  too every word of it   one man said it was
getting towards the long days and the short nights now   t'other one said
this warn't one of the short ones  he reckoned and then they laughed 
and he said it over again  and they laughed again  then they waked up
another fellow and told him  and laughed  but he didn't laugh  he ripped
out something brisk  and said let him alone   the first fellow said he
'lowed to tell it to his old woman she would think it was pretty good 
but he said that warn't nothing to some things he had said in his time 
i heard one man say it was nearly three o'clock  and he hoped daylight
wouldn't wait more than about a week longer   after that the talk got
further and further away  and i couldn't make out the words any more  but
i could hear the mumble  and now and then a laugh  too  but it seemed a
long ways off 

i was away below the ferry now   i rose up  and there was jackson's
island  about two mile and a half down stream  heavy timbered and
standing up out of the middle of the river  big and dark and solid  like
a steamboat without any lights   there warn't any signs of the bar at the
head it was all under water now 

it didn't take me long to get there   i shot past the head at a ripping
rate  the current was so swift  and then i got into the dead water and
landed on the side towards the illinois shore   i run the canoe into a
deep dent in the bank that i knowed about  i had to part the willow
branches to get in  and when i made fast nobody could a seen the canoe
from the outside 

i went up and set down on a log at the head of the island  and looked out
on the big river and the black driftwood and away over to the town  three
mile away  where there was three or four lights twinkling   a monstrous
big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream  coming along down  with a
lantern in the middle of it   i watched it come creeping down  and when
it was most abreast of where i stood i heard a man say   stern oars 
there! heave her head to stabboard!   i heard that just as plain as if
the man was by my side 

there was a little gray in the sky now  so i stepped into the woods  and
laid down for a nap before breakfast 




the sun was up so high when i waked that i judged it was after eight
o'clock   i laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about
things  and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied   i could
see the sun out at one or two holes  but mostly it was big trees all
about  and gloomy in there amongst them   there was freckled places on
the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves  and the
freckled places swapped about a little  showing there was a little breeze
up there   a couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me very
friendly 

i was powerful lazy and comfortable didn't want to get up and cook
breakfast   well  i was dozing off again when i thinks i hears a deep
sound of  boom!  away up the river   i rouses up  and rests on my elbow
and listens  pretty soon i hears it again   i hopped up  and went and
looked out at a hole in the leaves  and i see a bunch of smoke laying on
the water a long ways up about abreast the ferry   and there was the
ferryboat full of people floating along down   i knowed what was the
matter now    boom!  i see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat's
side   you see  they was firing cannon over the water  trying to make my
carcass come to the top 

i was pretty hungry  but it warn't going to do for me to start a fire 
because they might see the smoke   so i set there and watched the
cannon-smoke and listened to the boom   the river was a mile wide there 
and it always looks pretty on a summer morning so i was having a good
enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if i only had a bite to
eat  well  then i happened to think how they always put quicksilver in
loaves of bread and float them off  because they always go right to the
drownded carcass and stop there   so  says i  i'll keep a lookout  and if
any of them's floating around after me i'll give them a show   i changed
to the illinois edge of the island to see what luck i could have  and i
warn't disappointed   a big double loaf come along  and i most got it
with a long stick  but my foot slipped and she floated out further   of
course i was where the current set in the closest to the shore i knowed
enough for that   but by and by along comes another one  and this time i
won   i took out the plug and shook out the little dab of quicksilver 
and set my teeth in   it was  baker's bread  what the quality eat  none
of your low-down corn-pone 

i got a good place amongst the leaves  and set there on a log  munching
the bread and watching the ferry-boat  and very well satisfied   and then
something struck me   i says  now i reckon the widow or the parson or
somebody prayed that this bread would find me  and here it has gone and
done it   so there ain't no doubt but there is something in that thing
 that is  there's something in it when a body like the widow or the parson
prays  but it don't work for me  and i reckon it don't work for only just
the right kind 

i lit a pipe and had a good long smoke  and went on watching   the
ferryboat was floating with the current  and i allowed i'd have a chance
to see who was aboard when she come along  because she would come in
close  where the bread did   when she'd got pretty well along down
towards me  i put out my pipe and went to where i fished out the bread 
and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place   where the
log forked i could peep through 

by and by she come along  and she drifted in so close that they could a
run out a plank and walked ashore   most everybody was on the boat   pap 
and judge thatcher  and bessie thatcher  and jo harper  and tom sawyer 
and his old aunt polly  and sid and mary  and plenty more   everybody was
talking about the murder  but the captain broke in and says 

 look sharp  now  the current sets in the closest here  and maybe he's
washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water's edge   i
hope so  anyway  

 i didn't hope so   they all crowded up and leaned over the rails  nearly
in my face  and kept still  watching with all their might   i could see
them first-rate  but they couldn't see me   then the captain sung out 

 stand away!  and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that it
made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke  and i
judged i was gone   if they'd a had some bullets in  i reckon they'd a
got the corpse they was after   well  i see i warn't hurt  thanks to
goodness  the boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder
of the island   i could hear the booming now and then  further and
further off  and by and by  after an hour  i didn't hear it no more   the
island was three mile long   i judged they had got to the foot  and was
giving it up   but they didn't yet a while   they turned around the foot
of the island and started up the channel on the missouri side  under
steam  and booming once in a while as they went   i crossed over to that
side and watched them  when they got abreast the head of the island they
quit shooting and dropped over to the missouri shore and went home to the
town 

i knowed i was all right now   nobody else would come a-hunting after me 
i got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick
woods   i made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things under
so the rain couldn't get at them   i catched a catfish and haggled him
open with my saw  and towards sundown i started my camp fire and had
supper   then i set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast 

when it was dark i set by my camp fire smoking  and feeling pretty well
satisfied  but by and by it got sort of lonesome  and so i went and set
on the bank and listened to the current swashing along  and counted the
stars and drift logs and rafts that come down  and then went to bed 
there ain't no better way to put in time when you are lonesome  you can't
stay so  you soon get over it 

and so for three days and nights   no difference just the same thing 
but the next day i went exploring around down through the island   i was
boss of it  it all belonged to me  so to say  and i wanted to know all
about it  but mainly i wanted to put in the time   i found plenty
strawberries  ripe and prime  and green summer grapes  and green
razberries  and the green blackberries was just beginning to show   they
would all come handy by and by  i judged 

well  i went fooling along in the deep woods till i judged i warn't far
from the foot of the island   i had my gun along  but i hadn't shot
nothing  it was for protection  thought i would kill some game nigh home 
about this time i mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake  and it went
sliding off through the grass and flowers  and i after it  trying to get
a shot at it  i clipped along  and all of a sudden i bounded right on to
the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking 

my heart jumped up amongst my lungs   i never waited for to look further 
but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as fast as ever
i could   every now and then i stopped a second amongst the thick leaves
and listened  but my breath come so hard i couldn't hear nothing else   i
slunk along another piece further  then listened again  and so on  and so
on   if i see a stump  i took it for a man  if i trod on a stick and
broke it  it made me feel like a person had cut one of my breaths in two
and i only got half  and the short half  too 

when i got to camp i warn't feeling very brash  there warn't much sand in
my craw  but i says  this ain't no time to be fooling around   so i got
all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight  and i
put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an old last
year's camp  and then clumb a tree 

i reckon i was up in the tree two hours  but i didn't see nothing  i
didn't hear nothing i only thought i heard and seen as much as a
thousand things   well  i couldn't stay up there forever  so at last i
got down  but i kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the time 
all i could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast 

by the time it was night i was pretty hungry   so when it was good and
dark i slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the
illinois bank about a quarter of a mile   i went out in the woods and
cooked a supper  and i had about made up my mind i would stay there all
night when i hear a plunkety-plunk  plunkety-plunk  and says to myself 
horses coming  and next i hear people's voices   i got everything into
the canoe as quick as i could  and then went creeping through the woods
to see what i could find out   i hadn't got far when i hear a man say 

 we better camp here if we can find a good place  the horses is about
beat out   let's look around  

i didn't wait  but shoved out and paddled away easy   i tied up in the
old place  and reckoned i would sleep in the canoe 

i didn't sleep much   i couldn't  somehow  for thinking   and every time
i waked up i thought somebody had me by the neck   so the sleep didn't do
me no good   by and by i says to myself  i can't live this way  i'm
a-going to find out who it is that's here on the island with me  i'll
find it out or bust   well  i felt better right off 

so i took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two  and then
let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows   the moon was shining 
and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day   i poked
along well on to an hour  everything still as rocks and sound asleep 
well  by this time i was most down to the foot of the island   a little
ripply  cool breeze begun to blow  and that was as good as saying the
night was about done   i give her a turn with the paddle and brung her
nose to shore  then i got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the
woods   i sat down there on a log  and looked out through the leaves   i
see the moon go off watch  and the darkness begin to blanket the river 
but in a little while i see a pale streak over the treetops  and knowed
the day was coming   so i took my gun and slipped off towards where i had
run across that camp fire  stopping every minute or two to listen   but i
hadn't no luck somehow  i couldn't seem to find the place   but by and
by  sure enough  i catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees   i
went for it  cautious and slow   by and by i was close enough to have a
look  and there laid a man on the ground   it most give me the fantods 
he had a blanket around his head  and his head was nearly in the fire   i
set there behind a clump of bushes in about six foot of him  and kept my
eyes on him steady   it was getting gray daylight now   pretty soon he
gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket  and it was miss
watson's jim!  i bet i was glad to see him   i says 

 hello  jim!  and skipped out 

he bounced up and stared at me wild   then he drops down on his knees 
and puts his hands together and says 

 doan' hurt me don't!  i hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'   i alwuz
liked dead people  en done all i could for 'em   you go en git in de
river agin  whah you b'longs  en doan' do nuffn to ole jim  'at 'uz awluz
yo' fren'  

well  i warn't long making him understand i warn't dead   i was ever so
glad to see jim   i warn't lonesome now   i told him i warn't afraid of
him telling the people where i was   i talked along  but he only set
there and looked at me  never said nothing   then i says 

 it's good daylight   le's get breakfast   make up your camp fire good  

 what's de use er makin' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich
truck  but you got a gun  hain't you   den we kin git sumfn better den
strawbries  

 strawberries and such truck   i says    is that what you live on  

 i couldn' git nuffn else   he says 

 why  how long you been on the island  jim  

 i come heah de night arter you's killed  

 what  all that time  

 yes indeedy  

 and ain't you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat  

 no  sah nuffn else  

 well  you must be most starved  ain't you  

 i reck'n i could eat a hoss   i think i could  how long you ben on de
islan'  

 since the night i got killed  

 no!  w'y  what has you lived on   but you got a gun   oh  yes  you got a
gun   dat's good   now you kill sumfn en i'll make up de fire  

so we went over to where the canoe was  and while he built a fire in a
grassy open place amongst the trees  i fetched meal and bacon and coffee 
and coffee-pot and frying-pan  and sugar and tin cups  and the nigger was
set back considerable  because he reckoned it was all done with
witchcraft  i catched a good big catfish  too  and jim cleaned him with
his knife  and fried him 

when breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot 
jim laid it in with all his might  for he was most about starved   then
when we had got pretty well stuffed  we laid off and lazied   by and by
jim says 

 but looky here  huck  who wuz it dat 'uz killed in dat shanty ef it
warn't you  

then i told him the whole thing  and he said it was smart   he said tom
sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what i had   then i says 

 how do you come to be here  jim  and how'd you get here  

he looked pretty uneasy  and didn't say nothing for a minute   then he
says 

 maybe i better not tell  

 why  jim  

 well  dey's reasons   but you wouldn' tell on me ef i uz to tell you 
would you  huck  

 blamed if i would  jim  

 well  i b'lieve you  huck   i i run off  

 jim! 

 but mind  you said you wouldn' tell you know you said you wouldn' tell 
huck  

 well  i did   i said i wouldn't  and i'll stick to it   honest injun  i
will   people would call me a low-down abolitionist and despise me for
keeping mum but that don't make no difference   i ain't a-going to tell 
and i ain't a-going back there  anyways   so  now  le's know all about
it  

 well  you see  it 'uz dis way   ole missus dat's miss watson she pecks
on me all de time  en treats me pooty rough  but she awluz said she
wouldn' sell me down to orleans   but i noticed dey wuz a nigger trader
roun' de place considable lately  en i begin to git oneasy   well  one
night i creeps to de do' pooty late  en de do' warn't quite shet  en i
hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to orleans  but
she didn' want to  but she could git eight hund'd dollars for me  en it
'uz sich a big stack o' money she couldn' resis'   de widder she try to
git her to say she wouldn' do it  but i never waited to hear de res'   i
lit out mighty quick  i tell you 

 i tuck out en shin down de hill  en 'spec to steal a skift 'long de sho'
som'ers 'bove de town  but dey wuz people a-stirring yit  so i hid in de
ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to go 'way 
well  i wuz dah all night   dey wuz somebody roun' all de time   'long
'bout six in de mawnin' skifts begin to go by  en 'bout eight er nine
every skift dat went 'long wuz talkin' 'bout how yo' pap come over to de
town en say you's killed   dese las' skifts wuz full o' ladies en genlmen
a-goin' over for to see de place   sometimes dey'd pull up at de sho' en
take a res' b'fo' dey started acrost  so by de talk i got to know all
'bout de killin'   i 'uz powerful sorry you's killed  huck  but i ain't
no mo' now 

 i laid dah under de shavin's all day   i 'uz hungry  but i warn't
afeard  bekase i knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin' to start to de
camp-meet'n' right arter breakfas' en be gone all day  en dey knows i
goes off wid de cattle 'bout daylight  so dey wouldn' 'spec to see me
roun' de place  en so dey wouldn' miss me tell arter dark in de evenin' 
de yuther servants wouldn' miss me  kase dey'd shin out en take holiday
soon as de ole folks 'uz out'n de way 

 well  when it come dark i tuck out up de river road  en went 'bout two
mile er more to whah dey warn't no houses   i'd made up my mine 'bout
what i's agwyne to do   you see  ef i kep' on tryin' to git away afoot 
de dogs 'ud track me  ef i stole a skift to cross over  dey'd miss dat
skift  you see  en dey'd know 'bout whah i'd lan' on de yuther side  en
whah to pick up my track   so i says  a raff is what i's arter  it doan'
make no track 

 i see a light a-comin' roun' de p'int bymeby  so i wade' in en shove' a
log ahead o' me en swum more'n half way acrost de river  en got in
'mongst de drift-wood  en kep' my head down low  en kinder swum agin de
current tell de raff come along   den i swum to de stern uv it en tuck
a-holt   it clouded up en 'uz pooty dark for a little while   so i clumb
up en laid down on de planks   de men 'uz all 'way yonder in de middle 
whah de lantern wuz   de river wuz a-risin'  en dey wuz a good current 
so i reck'n'd 'at by fo' in de mawnin' i'd be twenty-five mile down de
river  en den i'd slip in jis b'fo' daylight en swim asho'  en take to
de woods on de illinois side 

 but i didn' have no luck   when we 'uz mos' down to de head er de islan'
a man begin to come aft wid de lantern  i see it warn't no use fer to
wait  so i slid overboard en struck out fer de islan'   well  i had a
notion i could lan' mos' anywhers  but i couldn't bank too bluff   i 'uz
mos' to de foot er de islan' b'fo' i found' a good place   i went into de
woods en jedged i wouldn' fool wid raffs no mo'  long as dey move de
lantern roun' so   i had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg  en some matches in
my cap  en dey warn't wet  so i 'uz all right  

 and so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time   why didn't
you get mud-turkles  

 how you gwyne to git 'm   you can't slip up on um en grab um  en how's a
body gwyne to hit um wid a rock   how could a body do it in de night   en
i warn't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime  

 well  that's so   you've had to keep in the woods all the time  of
course  did you hear 'em shooting the cannon  

 oh  yes   i knowed dey was arter you   i see um go by heah watched um
thoo de bushes  

some young birds come along  flying a yard or two at a time and lighting 
jim said it was a sign it was going to rain   he said it was a sign when
young chickens flew that way  and so he reckoned it was the same way when
young birds done it   i was going to catch some of them  but jim wouldn't
let me   he said it was death   he said his father laid mighty sick once 
and some of them catched a bird  and his old granny said his father would
die  and he did 

and jim said you mustn't count the things you are going to cook for
dinner  because that would bring bad luck   the same if you shook the
table-cloth after sundown   and he said if a man owned a beehive and that
man died  the bees must be told about it before sun-up next morning  or
else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die   jim said bees
wouldn't sting idiots  but i didn't believe that  because i had tried
them lots of times myself  and they wouldn't sting me 

i had heard about some of these things before  but not all of them   jim
knowed all kinds of signs   he said he knowed most everything   i said it
looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck  and so i asked him if
there warn't any good-luck signs   he says 

 mighty few an' dey ain't no use to a body   what you want to know when
good luck's a-comin' for   want to keep it off    and he said    ef you's
got hairy arms en a hairy breas'  it's a sign dat you's agwyne to be
rich  well  dey's some use in a sign like dat  'kase it's so fur ahead 
you see  maybe you's got to be po' a long time fust  en so you might git
discourage' en kill yo'sef 'f you didn' know by de sign dat you gwyne to
be rich bymeby  

 have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast  jim  

 what's de use to ax dat question   don't you see i has  

 well  are you rich  

 no  but i ben rich wunst  and gwyne to be rich agin   wunst i had foteen
dollars  but i tuck to specalat'n'  en got busted out  

 what did you speculate in  jim  

 well  fust i tackled stock  

 what kind of stock  

 why  live stock cattle  you know   i put ten dollars in a cow   but i
ain' gwyne to resk no mo' money in stock   de cow up 'n' died on my
han's  

 so you lost the ten dollars  

 no  i didn't lose it all   i on'y los' 'bout nine of it   i sole de hide
en taller for a dollar en ten cents  

 you had five dollars and ten cents left   did you speculate any more  

 yes   you know that one-laigged nigger dat b'longs to old misto bradish 
well  he sot up a bank  en say anybody dat put in a dollar would git fo'
dollars mo' at de en' er de year   well  all de niggers went in  but dey
didn't have much   i wuz de on'y one dat had much   so i stuck out for
mo' dan fo' dollars  en i said 'f i didn' git it i'd start a bank mysef 
well  o' course dat nigger want' to keep me out er de business  bekase he
says dey warn't business 'nough for two banks  so he say i could put in
my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en' er de year 

 so i done it   den i reck'n'd i'd inves' de thirty-five dollars right
off en keep things a-movin'   dey wuz a nigger name' bob  dat had ketched
a wood-flat  en his marster didn' know it  en i bought it off'n him en
told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en' er de year come  but
somebody stole de wood-flat dat night  en nex day de one-laigged nigger
say de bank's busted   so dey didn' none uv us git no money  

 what did you do with the ten cents  jim  

 well  i 'uz gwyne to spen' it  but i had a dream  en de dream tole me to
give it to a nigger name' balum balum's ass dey call him for short  he's
one er dem chuckleheads  you know   but he's lucky  dey say  en i see i
warn't lucky   de dream say let balum inves' de ten cents en he'd make a
raise for me   well  balum he tuck de money  en when he wuz in church he
hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po' len' to de lord  en boun'
to git his money back a hund'd times   so balum he tuck en give de ten
cents to de po'  en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to come of it  

 well  what did come of it  jim  

 nuffn never come of it   i couldn' manage to k'leck dat money no way  en
balum he couldn'   i ain' gwyne to len' no mo' money 'dout i see de
security   boun' to git yo' money back a hund'd times  de preacher says!
ef i could git de ten cents back  i'd call it squah  en be glad er de
chanst  

 well  it's all right anyway  jim  long as you're going to be rich again
some time or other  

 yes  en i's rich now  come to look at it   i owns mysef  en i's wuth
eight hund'd dollars   i wisht i had de money  i wouldn' want no mo'  




i wanted to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island
that i'd found when i was exploring  so we started and soon got to it 
because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile
wide 

this place was a tolerable long  steep hill or ridge about forty foot
high  we had a rough time getting to the top  the sides was so steep and
the bushes so thick   we tramped and clumb around all over it  and by and
by found a good big cavern in the rock  most up to the top on the side
towards illinois   the cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched
together  and jim could stand up straight in it   it was cool in there 
jim was for putting our traps in there right away  but i said we didn't
want to be climbing up and down there all the time 

jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place  and had all the traps
in the cavern  we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island 
and they would never find us without dogs   and  besides  he said them
little birds had said it was going to rain  and did i want the things to
get wet 

so we went back and got the canoe  and paddled up abreast the cavern  and
lugged all the traps up there   then we hunted up a place close by to
hide the canoe in  amongst the thick willows   we took some fish off of
the lines and set them again  and begun to get ready for dinner 

the door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in  and on one
side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit  and was flat and a
good place to build a fire on   so we built it there and cooked dinner 

we spread the blankets inside for a carpet  and eat our dinner in there 
we put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern   pretty soon
it darkened up  and begun to thunder and lighten  so the birds was right
about it   directly it begun to rain  and it rained like all fury  too 
and i never see the wind blow so   it was one of these regular summer
storms   it would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside  and
lovely  and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a
little ways looked dim and spider-webby  and here would come a blast of
wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the pale underside of the
leaves  and then a perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set
the branches to tossing their arms as if they was just wild  and next 
when it was just about the bluest and blackest fst! it was as bright as
glory  and you'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away
off yonder in the storm  hundreds of yards further than you could see
before  dark as sin again in a second  and now you'd hear the thunder let
go with an awful crash  and then go rumbling  grumbling  tumbling  down
the sky towards the under side of the world  like rolling empty barrels
down stairs where it's long stairs and they bounce a good deal  you
know 

 jim  this is nice   i says    i wouldn't want to be nowhere else but
here  pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread  

 well  you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for jim   you'd a ben
down dah in de woods widout any dinner  en gittn' mos' drownded  too  dat
you would  honey   chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain  en so do de
birds  chile  

the river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days  till at
last it was over the banks   the water was three or four foot deep on the
island in the low places and on the illinois bottom   on that side it was
a good many miles wide  but on the missouri side it was the same old
distance across a half a mile because the missouri shore was just a
wall of high bluffs 

daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe  it was mighty cool
and shady in the deep woods  even if the sun was blazing outside   we
went winding in and out amongst the trees  and sometimes the vines hung
so thick we had to back away and go some other way   well  on every old
broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things  and
when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame  on
account of being hungry  that you could paddle right up and put your hand
on them if you wanted to  but not the snakes and turtles they would
slide off in the water   the ridge our cavern was in was full of them 
we could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them 

one night we catched a little section of a lumber raft nice pine planks 
it was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long  and the
top stood above water six or seven inches a solid  level floor   we
could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes  but we let them go 
we didn't show ourselves in daylight 

another night when we was up at the head of the island  just before
daylight  here comes a frame-house down  on the west side   she was a
two-story  and tilted over considerable   we paddled out and got aboard
 clumb in at an upstairs window   but it was too dark to see yet  so we
made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight 

the light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island   then we
looked in at the window   we could make out a bed  and a table  and two
old chairs  and lots of things around about on the floor  and there was
clothes hanging against the wall   there was something laying on the
floor in the far corner that looked like a man   so jim says 

 hello  you! 

but it didn't budge   so i hollered again  and then jim says 

 de man ain't asleep he's dead   you hold still i'll go en see  

he went  and bent down and looked  and says 

 it's a dead man   yes  indeedy  naked  too   he's ben shot in de back 
i reck'n he's ben dead two er three days   come in  huck  but doan' look
at his face it's too gashly  

i didn't look at him at all   jim throwed some old rags over him  but he
needn't done it  i didn't want to see him   there was heaps of old greasy
cards scattered around over the floor  and old whisky bottles  and a
couple of masks made out of black cloth  and all over the walls was the
ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal   there was two
old dirty calico dresses  and a sun-bonnet  and some women's underclothes
hanging against the wall  and some men's clothing  too   we put the lot
into the canoe it might come good   there was a boy's old speckled straw
hat on the floor  i took that  too   and there was a bottle that had had
milk in it  and it had a rag stopper for a baby to suck   we would a took
the bottle  but it was broke   there was a seedy old chest  and an old
hair trunk with the hinges broke   they stood open  but there warn't
nothing left in them that was any account   the way things was scattered
about we reckoned the people left in a hurry  and warn't fixed so as to
carry off most of their stuff 

we got an old tin lantern  and a butcher-knife without any handle  and a
bran-new barlow knife worth two bits in any store  and a lot of tallow
candles  and a tin candlestick  and a gourd  and a tin cup  and a ratty
old bedquilt off the bed  and a reticule with needles and pins and
beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it  and a hatchet
and some nails  and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some
monstrous hooks on it  and a roll of buckskin  and a leather dog-collar 
and a horseshoe  and some vials of medicine that didn't have no label on
them  and just as we was leaving i found a tolerable good curry-comb  and
jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow  and a wooden leg   the straps was
broke off of it  but  barring that  it was a good enough leg  though it
was too long for me and not long enough for jim  and we couldn't find the
other one  though we hunted all around 

and so  take it all around  we made a good haul   when we was ready to
shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island  and it was pretty
broad day  so i made jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the
quilt  because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good ways
off   i paddled over to the illinois shore  and drifted down most a half
a mile doing it   i crept up the dead water under the bank  and hadn't no
accidents and didn't see nobody   we got home all safe 




after breakfast i wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he
come to be killed  but jim didn't want to   he said it would fetch bad
luck  and besides  he said  he might come and ha'nt us  he said a man
that warn't buried was more likely to go a-ha'nting around than one that
was planted and comfortable   that sounded pretty reasonable  so i didn't
say no more  but i couldn't keep from studying over it and wishing i
knowed who shot the man  and what they done it for 

we rummaged the clothes we'd got  and found eight dollars in silver sewed
up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat   jim said he reckoned the
people in that house stole the coat  because if they'd a knowed the money
was there they wouldn't a left it   i said i reckoned they killed him 
too  but jim didn't want to talk about that   i says 

 now you think it's bad luck  but what did you say when i fetched in the
snake-skin that i found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday 
you said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin
with my hands   well  here's your bad luck!  we've raked in all this
truck and eight dollars besides   i wish we could have some bad luck like
this every day  jim  

 never you mind  honey  never you mind   don't you git too peart   it's
a-comin'   mind i tell you  it's a-comin'  

it did come  too   it was a tuesday that we had that talk   well  after
dinner friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the
ridge  and got out of tobacco   i went to the cavern to get some  and
found a rattlesnake in there   i killed him  and curled him up on the
foot of jim's blanket  ever so natural  thinking there'd be some fun when
jim found him there   well  by night i forgot all about the snake  and
when jim flung himself down on the blanket while i struck a light the
snake's mate was there  and bit him 

he jumped up yelling  and the first thing the light showed was the
varmint curled up and ready for another spring   i laid him out in a
second with a stick  and jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and begun to pour
it down 

he was barefooted  and the snake bit him right on the heel   that all
comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave
a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it   jim told
me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away  and then skin the body
and roast a piece of it   i done it  and he eat it and said it would help
cure him  he made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist 
too   he said that that would help   then i slid out quiet and throwed
the snakes clear away amongst the bushes  for i warn't going to let jim
find out it was all my fault  not if i could help it 

jim sucked and sucked at the jug  and now and then he got out of his head
and pitched around and yelled  but every time he come to himself he went
to sucking at the jug again   his foot swelled up pretty big  and so did
his leg  but by and by the drunk begun to come  and so i judged he was
all right  but i'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's whisky 

jim was laid up for four days and nights   then the swelling was all gone
and he was around again   i made up my mind i wouldn't ever take a-holt
of a snake-skin again with my hands  now that i see what had come of it 
jim said he reckoned i would believe him next time   and he said that
handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't got to
the end of it yet   he said he druther see the new moon over his left
shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his
hand   well  i was getting to feel that way myself  though i've always
reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of
the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do   old hank bunker
done it once  and bragged about it  and in less than two years he got
drunk and fell off of the shot-tower  and spread himself out so that he
was just a kind of a layer  as you may say  and they slid him edgeways
between two barn doors for a coffin  and buried him so  so they say  but
i didn't see it   pap told me   but anyway it all come of looking at the
moon that way  like a fool 

well  the days went along  and the river went down between its banks
again  and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big hooks
with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as big as a
man  being six foot two inches long  and weighed over two hundred pounds 
we couldn't handle him  of course  he would a flung us into illinois   we
just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded   we
found a brass button in his stomach and a round ball  and lots of
rubbage   we split the ball open with the hatchet  and there was a spool
in it   jim said he'd had it there a long time  to coat it over so and
make a ball of it   it was as big a fish as was ever catched in the
mississippi  i reckon   jim said he hadn't ever seen a bigger one   he
would a been worth a good deal over at the village   they peddle out such
a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there  everybody buys
some of him  his meat's as white as snow and makes a good fry 

next morning i said it was getting slow and dull  and i wanted to get a
stirring up some way   i said i reckoned i would slip over the river and
find out what was going on   jim liked that notion  but he said i must go
in the dark and look sharp   then he studied it over and said  couldn't i
put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl   that was a good
notion  too   so we shortened up one of the calico gowns  and i turned up
my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it   jim hitched it behind with
the hooks  and it was a fair fit   i put on the sun-bonnet and tied it
under my chin  and then for a body to look in and see my face was like
looking down a joint of stove-pipe   jim said nobody would know me  even
in the daytime  hardly   i practiced around all day to get the hang of
the things  and by and by i could do pretty well in them  only jim said i
didn't walk like a girl  and he said i must quit pulling up my gown to
get at my britches-pocket   i took notice  and done better 

i started up the illinois shore in the canoe just after dark 

i started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing  and
the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town   i tied
up and started along the bank   there was a light burning in a little
shanty that hadn't been lived in for a long time  and i wondered who had
took up quarters there   i slipped up and peeped in at the window   there
was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a candle that was
on a pine table   i didn't know her face  she was a stranger  for you
couldn't start a face in that town that i didn't know   now this was
lucky  because i was weakening  i was getting afraid i had come  people
might know my voice and find me out   but if this woman had been in such
a little town two days she could tell me all i wanted to know  so i
knocked at the door  and made up my mind i wouldn't forget i was a girl 




 come in   says the woman  and i did   she says    take a cheer  

i done it   she looked me all over with her little shiny eyes  and says 

 what might your name be  

 sarah williams  

 where 'bouts do you live   in this neighborhood '

 no'm   in hookerville  seven mile below   i've walked all the way and
i'm all tired out  

 hungry  too  i reckon   i'll find you something  

 no'm  i ain't hungry   i was so hungry i had to stop two miles below
here at a farm  so i ain't hungry no more   it's what makes me so late 
my mother's down sick  and out of money and everything  and i come to
tell my uncle abner moore   he lives at the upper end of the town  she
says   i hain't ever been here before   do you know him  

 no  but i don't know everybody yet   i haven't lived here quite two
weeks  it's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town   you better
stay here all night   take off your bonnet  

 no   i says   i'll rest a while  i reckon  and go on   i ain't afeared
of the dark  

she said she wouldn't let me go by myself  but her husband would be in by
and by  maybe in a hour and a half  and she'd send him along with me 
then she got to talking about her husband  and about her relations up the
river  and her relations down the river  and about how much better off
they used to was  and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake
coming to our town  instead of letting well alone and so on and so on 
till i was afeard i had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was
going on in the town  but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder 
and then i was pretty willing to let her clatter right along   she told
about me and tom sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only she got it
ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was  and what a hard lot i
was  and at last she got down to where i was murdered   i says 

 who done it   we've heard considerable about these goings on down in
hookerville  but we don't know who 'twas that killed huck finn  

 well  i reckon there's a right smart chance of people here that'd like
to know who killed him   some think old finn done it himself  

 no is that so  

 most everybody thought it at first   he'll never know how nigh he come
to getting lynched   but before night they changed around and judged it
was done by a runaway nigger named jim  

 why he  

i stopped   i reckoned i better keep still   she run on  and never
noticed i had put in at all 

 the nigger run off the very night huck finn was killed   so there's a
reward out for him three hundred dollars   and there's a reward out for
old finn  too two hundred dollars   you see  he come to town the morning
after the murder  and told about it  and was out with 'em on the
ferryboat hunt  and right away after he up and left   before night they
wanted to lynch him  but he was gone  you see   well  next day they found
out the nigger was gone  they found out he hadn't ben seen sence ten
o'clock the night the murder was done   so then they put it on him  you
see  and while they was full of it  next day  back comes old finn  and
went boo-hooing to judge thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all
over illinois with  the judge gave him some  and that evening he got
drunk  and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty
hard-looking strangers  and then went off with them   well  he hain't
come back sence  and they ain't looking for him back till this thing
blows over a little  for people thinks now that he killed his boy and
fixed things so folks would think robbers done it  and then he'd get
huck's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit   people
do say he warn't any too good to do it   oh  he's sly  i reckon   if he
don't come back for a year he'll be all right   you can't prove anything
on him  you know  everything will be quieted down then  and he'll walk in
huck's money as easy as nothing  

 yes  i reckon so  'm   i don't see nothing in the way of it   has
everybody quit thinking the nigger done it  

 oh  no  not everybody   a good many thinks he done it   but they'll get
the nigger pretty soon now  and maybe they can scare it out of him  

 why  are they after him yet  

 well  you're innocent  ain't you!  does three hundred dollars lay around
every day for people to pick up   some folks think the nigger ain't far
from here   i'm one of them but i hain't talked it around   a few days
ago i was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log
shanty  and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island
over yonder that they call jackson's island   don't anybody live there 
says i  no  nobody  says they   i didn't say any more  but i done some
thinking   i was pretty near certain i'd seen smoke over there  about the
head of the island  a day or two before that  so i says to myself  like
as not that nigger's hiding over there  anyway  says i  it's worth the
trouble to give the place a hunt   i hain't seen any smoke sence  so i
reckon maybe he's gone  if it was him  but husband's going over to see
 him and another man   he was gone up the river  but he got back to-day 
and i told him as soon as he got here two hours ago  

i had got so uneasy i couldn't set still   i had to do something with my
hands  so i took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it 
my hands shook  and i was making a bad job of it   when the woman stopped
talking i looked up  and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling
a little   i put down the needle and thread  and let on to be interested
 and i was  too and says 

 three hundred dollars is a power of money   i wish my mother could get
it  is your husband going over there to-night  

 oh  yes   he went up-town with the man i was telling you of  to get a
boat and see if they could borrow another gun   they'll go over after
midnight  

 couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime  

 yes   and couldn't the nigger see better  too   after midnight he'll
likely be asleep  and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up
his camp fire all the better for the dark  if he's got one  

 i didn't think of that  

the woman kept looking at me pretty curious  and i didn't feel a bit
comfortable   pretty soon she says 

 what did you say your name was  honey  

 m mary williams  

somehow it didn't seem to me that i said it was mary before  so i didn't
look up seemed to me i said it was sarah  so i felt sort of cornered 
and was afeared maybe i was looking it  too   i wished the woman would
say something more  the longer she set still the uneasier i was   but now
she says 

 honey  i thought you said it was sarah when you first come in  

 oh  yes'm  i did   sarah mary williams   sarah's my first name   some
calls me sarah  some calls me mary  

 oh  that's the way of it  

 yes'm  

i was feeling better then  but i wished i was out of there  anyway   i
couldn't look up yet 

well  the woman fell to talking about how hard times was  and how poor
they had to live  and how the rats was as free as if they owned the
place  and so forth and so on  and then i got easy again   she was right
about the rats  you'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner
every little while   she said she had to have things handy to throw at
them when she was alone  or they wouldn't give her no peace   she showed
me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot  and said she was a good shot
with it generly  but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago  and didn't
know whether she could throw true now   but she watched for a chance  and
directly banged away at a rat  but she missed him wide  and said  ouch! 
it hurt her arm so   then she told me to try for the next one   i wanted
to be getting away before the old man got back  but of course i didn't
let on   i got the thing  and the first rat that showed his nose i let
drive  and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a been a tolerable sick
rat   she said that was first-rate  and she reckoned i would hive the
next one   she went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back  and
brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with   i
held up my two hands and she put the hank over them  and went on talking
about her and her husband's matters   but she broke off to say 

 keep your eye on the rats   you better have the lead in your lap 
handy  

so she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment  and i clapped my
legs together on it and she went on talking   but only about a minute 
then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face  and very
pleasant  and says 

 come  now  what's your real name  

 wh what  mum  

 what's your real name   is it bill  or tom  or bob  or what is it  

i reckon i shook like a leaf  and i didn't know hardly what to do   but i
says 

 please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me  mum   if i'm in the way
here  i'll  

 no  you won't   set down and stay where you are   i ain't going to hurt
you  and i ain't going to tell on you  nuther   you just tell me your
secret  and trust me   i'll keep it  and  what's more  i'll help you 
so'll my old man if you want him to   you see  you're a runaway
'prentice  that's all   it ain't anything   there ain't no harm in it 
you've been treated bad  and you made up your mind to cut   bless you 
child  i wouldn't tell on you   tell me all about it now  that's a good
boy  

so i said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer  and i would
just make a clean breast and tell her everything  but she musn't go back
on her promise   then i told her my father and mother was dead  and the
law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back
from the river  and he treated me so bad i couldn't stand it no longer 
he went away to be gone a couple of days  and so i took my chance and
stole some of his daughter's old clothes and cleared out  and i had been
three nights coming the thirty miles   i traveled nights  and hid
daytimes and slept  and the bag of bread and meat i carried from home
lasted me all the way  and i had a-plenty   i said i believed my uncle
abner moore would take care of me  and so that was why i struck out for
this town of goshen 

 goshen  child   this ain't goshen   this is st  petersburg   goshen's
ten mile further up the river   who told you this was goshen  

 why  a man i met at daybreak this morning  just as i was going to turn
into the woods for my regular sleep   he told me when the roads forked i
must take the right hand  and five mile would fetch me to goshen  

 he was drunk  i reckon   he told you just exactly wrong  

 well  he did act like he was drunk  but it ain't no matter now   i got
to be moving along   i'll fetch goshen before daylight  

 hold on a minute   i'll put you up a snack to eat   you might want it  

so she put me up a snack  and says 

 say  when a cow's laying down  which end of her gets up first   answer
up prompt now don't stop to study over it   which end gets up first  

 the hind end  mum  

 well  then  a horse  

 the for'rard end  mum  

 which side of a tree does the moss grow on  

 north side  

 if fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside  how many of them eats with
their heads pointed the same direction  

 the whole fifteen  mum  

 well  i reckon you have lived in the country   i thought maybe you was
trying to hocus me again   what's your real name  now  

 george peters  mum  

 well  try to remember it  george   don't forget and tell me it's
elexander before you go  and then get out by saying it's george elexander
when i catch you   and don't go about women in that old calico   you do a
girl tolerable poor  but you might fool men  maybe   bless you  child 
when you set out to thread a needle don't hold the thread still and fetch
the needle up to it  hold the needle still and poke the thread at it 
that's the way a woman most always does  but a man always does t'other
way   and when you throw at a rat or anything  hitch yourself up a tiptoe
and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can  and miss
your rat about six or seven foot  throw stiff-armed from the shoulder 
like there was a pivot there for it to turn on  like a girl  not from the
wrist and elbow  with your arm out to one side  like a boy   and  mind
you  when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees
apart  she don't clap them together  the way you did when you catched the
lump of lead   why  i spotted you for a boy when you was threading the
needle  and i contrived the other things just to make certain   now trot
along to your uncle  sarah mary williams george elexander peters  and if
you get into trouble you send word to mrs  judith loftus  which is me 
and i'll do what i can to get you out of it   keep the river road all the
way  and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you  the river
road's a rocky one  and your feet'll be in a condition when you get to
goshen  i reckon  

i went up the bank about fifty yards  and then i doubled on my tracks and
slipped back to where my canoe was  a good piece below the house   i
jumped in  and was off in a hurry   i went up-stream far enough to make
the head of the island  and then started across   i took off the
sun-bonnet  for i didn't want no blinders on then   when i was about the
middle i heard the clock begin to strike  so i stops and listens  the
sound come faint over the water but clear eleven   when i struck the
head of the island i never waited to blow  though i was most winded  but
i shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be  and started
a good fire there on a high and dry spot 

then i jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place  a mile and a half
below  as hard as i could go   i landed  and slopped through the timber
and up the ridge and into the cavern   there jim laid  sound asleep on
the ground   i roused him out and says 

 git up and hump yourself  jim!  there ain't a minute to lose   they're
after us! 

jim never asked no questions  he never said a word  but the way he worked
for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared   by that time
everything we had in the world was on our raft  and she was ready to be
shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid   we put out the camp
fire at the cavern the first thing  and didn't show a candle outside
after that 

i took the canoe out from the shore a little piece  and took a look  but
if there was a boat around i couldn't see it  for stars and shadows ain't
good to see by   then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the
shade  past the foot of the island dead still never saying a word 




it must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at
last  and the raft did seem to go mighty slow   if a boat was to come
along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the illinois shore 
and it was well a boat didn't come  for we hadn't ever thought to put the
gun in the canoe  or a fishing-line  or anything to eat   we was in
ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things   it warn't good
judgment to put everything on the raft 

if the men went to the island i just expect they found the camp fire i
built  and watched it all night for jim to come   anyways  they stayed
away from us  and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn't no
fault of mine   i played it as low down on them as i could 

when the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a
big bend on the illinois side  and hacked off cottonwood branches with
the hatchet  and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there
had been a cave-in in the bank there   a tow-head is a sandbar that has
cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth 

we had mountains on the missouri shore and heavy timber on the illinois
side  and the channel was down the missouri shore at that place  so we
warn't afraid of anybody running across us   we laid there all day  and
watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the missouri shore  and
up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle   i told jim all
about the time i had jabbering with that woman  and jim said she was a
smart one  and if she was to start after us herself she wouldn't set down
and watch a camp fire no  sir  she'd fetch a dog   well  then  i said 
why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog   jim said he bet she
did think of it by the time the men was ready to start  and he believed
they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time  or
else we wouldn't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the
village no  indeedy  we would be in that same old town again   so i said
i didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long as they
didn't 

when it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the
cottonwood thicket  and looked up and down and across  nothing in sight 
so jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam
to get under in blazing weather and rainy  and to keep the things dry 
jim made a floor for the wigwam  and raised it a foot or more above the
level of the raft  so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach
of steamboat waves   right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of
dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it
to its place  this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly 
the wigwam would keep it from being seen   we made an extra steering-oar 
too  because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something 
we fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on  because we
must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming
down-stream  to keep from getting run over  but we wouldn't have to light
it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a
 crossing   for the river was pretty high yet  very low banks being still
a little under water  so up-bound boats didn't always run the channel 
but hunted easy water 

this second night we run between seven and eight hours  with a current
that was making over four mile an hour   we catched fish and talked  and
we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness   it was kind of
solemn  drifting down the big  still river  laying on our backs looking
up at the stars  and we didn't ever feel like talking loud  and it warn't
often that we laughed only a little kind of a low chuckle   we had
mighty good weather as a general thing  and nothing ever happened to us
at all that night  nor the next  nor the next 

every night we passed towns  some of them away up on black hillsides 
nothing but just a shiny bed of lights  not a house could you see   the
fifth night we passed st  louis  and it was like the whole world lit up 
in st  petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand
people in st  louis  but i never believed it till i see that wonderful
spread of lights at two o'clock that still night   there warn't a sound
there  everybody was asleep 

every night now i used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little
village  and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of meal or bacon or other
stuff to eat  and sometimes i lifted a chicken that warn't roosting
comfortable  and took him along   pap always said  take a chicken when
you get a chance  because if you don't want him yourself you can easy
find somebody that does  and a good deed ain't ever forgot   i never see
pap when he didn't want the chicken himself  but that is what he used to
say  anyway 

mornings before daylight i slipped into cornfields and borrowed a
watermelon  or a mushmelon  or a punkin  or some new corn  or things of
that kind   pap always said it warn't no harm to borrow things if you was
meaning to pay them back some time  but the widow said it warn't anything
but a soft name for stealing  and no decent body would do it   jim said
he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right  so the
best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list
and say we wouldn't borrow them any more then he reckoned it wouldn't be
no harm to borrow the others   so we talked it over all one night 
drifting along down the river  trying to make up our minds whether to
drop the watermelons  or the cantelopes  or the mushmelons  or what   but
towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory  and concluded to
drop crabapples and p'simmons   we warn't feeling just right before that 
but it was all comfortable now   i was glad the way it come out  too 
because crabapples ain't ever good  and the p'simmons wouldn't be ripe
for two or three months yet 

we shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or
didn't go to bed early enough in the evening   take it all round  we
lived pretty high 

the fifth night below st  louis we had a big storm after midnight  with a
power of thunder and lightning  and the rain poured down in a solid
sheet  we stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself 
when the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead 
and high  rocky bluffs on both sides   by and by says i   hel-lo  jim 
looky yonder!  it was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock   we
was drifting straight down for her   the lightning showed her very
distinct   she was leaning over  with part of her upper deck above water 
and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear  and a chair
by the big bell  with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it  when
the flashes come 

well  it being away in the night and stormy  and all so mysterious-like 
i felt just the way any other boy would a felt when i see that wreck
laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river   i
wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little  and see what there
was there   so i says 

 le's land on her  jim  

but jim was dead against it at first   he says 

 i doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack   we's doin' blame' well  en
we better let blame' well alone  as de good book says   like as not dey's
a watchman on dat wrack  

 watchman your grandmother   i says   there ain't nothing to watch but
the texas and the pilot-house  and do you reckon anybody's going to resk
his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this  when it's
likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute    jim couldn't
say nothing to that  so he didn't try    and besides   i says   we might
borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom   seegars  i
bet you and cost five cents apiece  solid cash   steamboat captains is
always rich  and get sixty dollars a month  and they don't care a cent
what a thing costs  you know  long as they want it   stick a candle in
your pocket  i can't rest  jim  till we give her a rummaging   do you
reckon tom sawyer would ever go by this thing   not for pie  he wouldn't 
he'd call it an adventure that's what he'd call it  and he'd land on
that wreck if it was his last act   and wouldn't he throw style into it 
 wouldn't he spread himself  nor nothing   why  you'd think it was
christopher c'lumbus discovering kingdom-come   i wish tom sawyer was
here  

jim he grumbled a little  but give in   he said we mustn't talk any more
than we could help  and then talk mighty low   the lightning showed us
the wreck again just in time  and we fetched the stabboard derrick  and
made fast there 

the deck was high out here   we went sneaking down the slope of it to
labboard  in the dark  towards the texas  feeling our way slow with our
feet  and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys  for it was so
dark we couldn't see no sign of them   pretty soon we struck the forward
end of the skylight  and clumb on to it  and the next step fetched us in
front of the captain's door  which was open  and by jimminy  away down
through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second we seem
to hear low voices in yonder!

jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick  and told me to come
along   i says  all right  and was going to start for the raft  but just
then i heard a voice wail out and say 

 oh  please don't  boys  i swear i won't ever tell! 

another voice said  pretty loud 

 it's a lie  jim turner   you've acted this way before   you always want
more'n your share of the truck  and you've always got it  too  because
you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell   but this time you've said it
jest one time too many   you're the meanest  treacherousest hound in this
country  

by this time jim was gone for the raft   i was just a-biling with
curiosity  and i says to myself  tom sawyer wouldn't back out now  and so
i won't either  i'm a-going to see what's going on here   so i dropped on
my hands and knees in the little passage  and crept aft in the dark till
there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the
texas   then in there i see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand
and foot  and two men standing over him  and one of them had a dim
lantern in his hand  and the other one had a pistol   this one kept
pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor  and saying 

 i'd like to!  and i orter  too a mean skunk! 

the man on the floor would shrivel up and say   oh  please don't  bill  i
hain't ever goin' to tell  

and every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say 

 'deed you ain't!  you never said no truer thing 'n that  you bet you  
and once he said    hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't got the best of
him and tied him he'd a killed us both   and what for   jist for noth'n 
jist because we stood on our rights that's what for   but i lay you
ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more  jim turner   put up that
pistol  bill  

bill says 

 i don't want to  jake packard   i'm for killin' him and didn't he kill
old hatfield jist the same way and don't he deserve it  

 but i don't want him killed  and i've got my reasons for it  

 bless yo' heart for them words  jake packard!  i'll never forgit you
long's i live!  says the man on the floor  sort of blubbering 

packard didn't take no notice of that  but hung up his lantern on a nail
and started towards where i was there in the dark  and motioned bill to
come   i crawfished as fast as i could about two yards  but the boat
slanted so that i couldn't make very good time  so to keep from getting
run over and catched i crawled into a stateroom on the upper side   the
man came a-pawing along in the dark  and when packard got to my
stateroom  he says 

 here come in here  

and in he come  and bill after him   but before they got in i was up in
the upper berth  cornered  and sorry i come   then they stood there  with
their hands on the ledge of the berth  and talked   i couldn't see them 
but i could tell where they was by the whisky they'd been having   i was
glad i didn't drink whisky  but it wouldn't made much difference anyway 
because most of the time they couldn't a treed me because i didn't
breathe   i was too scared   and  besides  a body couldn't breathe and
hear such talk   they talked low and earnest   bill wanted to kill
turner   he says 

 he's said he'll tell  and he will   if we was to give both our shares to
him now it wouldn't make no difference after the row and the way we've
served him   shore's you're born  he'll turn state's evidence  now you
hear me   i'm for putting him out of his troubles  

 so'm i   says packard  very quiet 

 blame it  i'd sorter begun to think you wasn't   well  then  that's all
right   le's go and do it  

 hold on a minute  i hain't had my say yit   you listen to me 
shooting's good  but there's quieter ways if the thing's got to be done 
but what i say is this   it ain't good sense to go court'n around after a
halter if you can git at what you're up to in some way that's jist as
good and at the same time don't bring you into no resks   ain't that so  

 you bet it is   but how you goin' to manage it this time  

 well  my idea is this   we'll rustle around and gather up whatever
pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms  and shove for shore and hide
the truck  then we'll wait   now i say it ain't a-goin' to be more'n two
hours befo' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river   see 
he'll be drownded  and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own
self   i reckon that's a considerble sight better 'n killin' of him   i'm
unfavorable to killin' a man as long as you can git aroun' it  it ain't
good sense  it ain't good morals   ain't i right  

 yes  i reck'n you are   but s'pose she don't break up and wash off  

 well  we can wait the two hours anyway and see  can't we  

 all right  then  come along  

so they started  and i lit out  all in a cold sweat  and scrambled
forward  it was dark as pitch there  but i said  in a kind of a coarse
whisper   jim!  and he answered up  right at my elbow  with a sort of a
moan  and i says 

 quick  jim  it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning  there's a
gang of murderers in yonder  and if we don't hunt up their boat and set
her drifting down the river so these fellows can't get away from the
wreck there's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix   but if we find their
boat we can put all of 'em in a bad fix for the sheriff 'll get 'em 
quick hurry!  i'll hunt the labboard side  you hunt the stabboard 
you start at the raft  and  

 oh  my lordy  lordy!  raf'   dey ain' no raf' no mo'  she done broke
loose en gone i en here we is! 




well  i catched my breath and most fainted   shut up on a wreck with such
a gang as that!  but it warn't no time to be sentimentering   we'd got to
find that boat now had to have it for ourselves   so we went a-quaking
and shaking down the stabboard side  and slow work it was  too seemed a
week before we got to the stern   no sign of a boat   jim said he didn't
believe he could go any further so scared he hadn't hardly any strength
left  he said   but i said  come on  if we get left on this wreck we are
in a fix  sure   so on we prowled again   we struck for the stern of the
texas  and found it  and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight 
hanging on from shutter to shutter  for the edge of the skylight was in
the water   when we got pretty close to the cross-hall door there was the
skiff  sure enough!  i could just barely see her   i felt ever so
thankful   in another second i would a been aboard of her  but just then
the door opened   one of the men stuck his head out only about a couple
of foot from me  and i thought i was gone  but he jerked it in again  and
says 

 heave that blame lantern out o' sight  bill! 

he flung a bag of something into the boat  and then got in himself and
set down   it was packard   then bill he come out and got in   packard
says  in a low voice 

 all ready shove off! 

i couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters  i was so weak   but bill says 

 hold on 'd you go through him  

 no   didn't you  

 no   so he's got his share o' the cash yet  

 well  then  come along  no use to take truck and leave money  

 say  won't he suspicion what we're up to  

 maybe he won't   but we got to have it anyway  come along  

so they got out and went in 

the door slammed to because it was on the careened side  and in a half
second i was in the boat  and jim come tumbling after me   i out with my
knife and cut the rope  and away we went!

we didn't touch an oar  and we didn't speak nor whisper  nor hardly even
breathe   we went gliding swift along  dead silent  past the tip of the
paddle-box  and past the stern  then in a second or two more we was a
hundred yards below the wreck  and the darkness soaked her up  every last
sign of her  and we was safe  and knowed it 

when we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern
show like a little spark at the texas door for a second  and we knowed by
that that the rascals had missed their boat  and was beginning to
understand that they was in just as much trouble now as jim turner was 

then jim manned the oars  and we took out after our raft   now was the
first time that i begun to worry about the men i reckon i hadn't had
time to before   i begun to think how dreadful it was  even for
murderers  to be in such a fix   i says to myself  there ain't no telling
but i might come to be a murderer myself yet  and then how would i like
it   so says i to jim 

 the first light we see we'll land a hundred yards below it or above it 
in a place where it's a good hiding-place