for you and the skiff  and then
i'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn  and get somebody to go for that
gang and get them out of their scrape  so they can be hung when their
time comes  

but that idea was a failure  for pretty soon it begun to storm again  and
this time worse than ever   the rain poured down  and never a light
showed  everybody in bed  i reckon   we boomed along down the river 
watching for lights and watching for our raft   after a long time the
rain let up  but the clouds stayed  and the lightning kept whimpering 
and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead  floating  and we
made for it 

it was the raft  and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again   we
seen a light now away down to the right  on shore   so i said i would go
for it  the skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole
there on the wreck   we hustled it on to the raft in a pile  and i told
jim to float along down  and show a light when he judged he had gone
about two mile  and keep it burning till i come  then i manned my oars
and shoved for the light   as i got down towards it three or four more
showed up on a hillside   it was a village   i closed in above the shore
light  and laid on my oars and floated   as i went by i see it was a
lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat   i skimmed
around for the watchman  a-wondering whereabouts he slept  and by and by
i found him roosting on the bitts forward  with his head down between his
knees   i gave his shoulder two or three little shoves  and begun to cry 

he stirred up in a kind of a startlish way  but when he see it was only
me he took a good gap and stretch  and then he says 

 hello  what's up   don't cry  bub   what's the trouble  

i says 

 pap  and mam  and sis  and  

then i broke down   he says 

 oh  dang it now  don't take on so  we all has to have our troubles  and
this 'n 'll come out all right   what's the matter with 'em  

 they're they're are you the watchman of the boat  

 yes   he says  kind of pretty-well-satisfied like    i'm the captain and
the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head deck-hand  and
sometimes i'm the freight and passengers   i ain't as rich as old jim
hornback  and i can't be so blame' generous and good to tom  dick  and
harry as what he is  and slam around money the way he does  but i've told
him a many a time 't i wouldn't trade places with him  for  says i  a
sailor's life's the life for me  and i'm derned if i'd live two mile out
o' town  where there ain't nothing ever goin' on  not for all his
spondulicks and as much more on top of it   says i  

i broke in and says 

 they're in an awful peck of trouble  and  

 who is  

 why  pap and mam and sis and miss hooker  and if you'd take your
ferryboat and go up there  

 up where   where are they  

 on the wreck  

 what wreck  

 why  there ain't but one  

 what  you don't mean the walter scott  

 yes  

 good land! what are they doin' there  for gracious sakes  

 well  they didn't go there a-purpose  

 i bet they didn't!  why  great goodness  there ain't no chance for 'em
if they don't git off mighty quick!  why  how in the nation did they ever
git into such a scrape  

 easy enough   miss hooker was a-visiting up there to the town  

 yes  booth's landing go on  

 she was a-visiting there at booth's landing  and just in the edge of the
evening she started over with her nigger woman in the horse-ferry to stay
all night at her friend's house  miss what-you-may-call-her i disremember
her name and they lost their steering-oar  and swung around and went
a-floating down  stern first  about two mile  and saddle-baggsed on the
wreck  and the ferryman and the nigger woman and the horses was all lost 
but miss hooker she made a grab and got aboard the wreck   well  about an
hour after dark we come along down in our trading-scow  and it was so
dark we didn't notice the wreck till we was right on it  and so we
saddle-baggsed  but all of us was saved but bill whipple and oh  he was
the best cretur! i most wish 't it had been me  i do  

 my george!  it's the beatenest thing i ever struck   and then what did
you all do  

 well  we hollered and took on  but it's so wide there we couldn't make
nobody hear   so pap said somebody got to get ashore and get help
somehow  i was the only one that could swim  so i made a dash for it  and
miss hooker she said if i didn't strike help sooner  come here and hunt
up her uncle  and he'd fix the thing   i made the land about a mile
below  and been fooling along ever since  trying to get people to do
something  but they said  'what  in such a night and such a current 
there ain't no sense in it  go for the steam ferry '  now if you'll go
and  

 by jackson  i'd like to  and  blame it  i don't know but i will  but who
in the dingnation's a-going' to pay for it   do you reckon your pap  

 why that's all right   miss hooker she tole me  particular  that her
uncle hornback  

 great guns! is he her uncle   looky here  you break for that light over
yonder-way  and turn out west when you git there  and about a quarter of
a mile out you'll come to the tavern  tell 'em to dart you out to jim
hornback's  and he'll foot the bill   and don't you fool around any 
because he'll want to know the news   tell him i'll have his niece all
safe before he can get to town   hump yourself  now  i'm a-going up
around the corner here to roust out my engineer  

i struck for the light  but as soon as he turned the corner i went back
and got into my skiff and bailed her out  and then pulled up shore in the
easy water about six hundred yards  and tucked myself in among some
woodboats  for i couldn't rest easy till i could see the ferryboat start 
but take it all around  i was feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of
taking all this trouble for that gang  for not many would a done it   i
wished the widow knowed about it   i judged she would be proud of me for
helping these rapscallions  because rapscallions and dead beats is the
kind the widow and good people takes the most interest in 

well  before long here comes the wreck  dim and dusky  sliding along
down! a kind of cold shiver went through me  and then i struck out for
her   she was very deep  and i see in a minute there warn't much chance
for anybody being alive in her   i pulled all around her and hollered a
little  but there wasn't any answer  all dead still   i felt a little bit
heavy-hearted about the gang  but not much  for i reckoned if they could
stand it i could 

then here comes the ferryboat  so i shoved for the middle of the river on
a long down-stream slant  and when i judged i was out of eye-reach i laid
on my oars  and looked back and see her go and smell around the wreck for
miss hooker's remainders  because the captain would know her uncle
hornback would want them  and then pretty soon the ferryboat give it up
and went for the shore  and i laid into my work and went a-booming down
the river 

it did seem a powerful long time before jim's light showed up  and when
it did show it looked like it was a thousand mile off   by the time i got
there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east  so we
struck for an island  and hid the raft  and sunk the skiff  and turned in
and slept like dead people 




by and by  when we got up  we turned over the truck the gang had stole
off of the wreck  and found boots  and blankets  and clothes  and all
sorts of other things  and a lot of books  and a spyglass  and three
boxes of seegars   we hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of our
lives   the seegars was prime   we laid off all the afternoon in the
woods talking  and me reading the books  and having a general good time 
i told jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the ferryboat 
and i said these kinds of things was adventures  but he said he didn't
want no more adventures   he said that when i went in the texas and he
crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he nearly died 
because he judged it was all up with him anyway it could be fixed  for if
he didn't get saved he would get drownded  and if he did get saved 
whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get the reward  and
then miss watson would sell him south  sure   well  he was right  he was
most always right  he had an uncommon level head for a nigger 

i read considerable to jim about kings and dukes and earls and such  and
how gaudy they dressed  and how much style they put on  and called each
other your majesty  and your grace  and your lordship  and so on  'stead
of mister  and jim's eyes bugged out  and he was interested   he says 

 i didn' know dey was so many un um   i hain't hearn 'bout none un um 
skasely  but ole king sollermun  onless you counts dem kings dat's in a
pack er k'yards   how much do a king git  

 get    i says   why  they get a thousand dollars a month if they want
it  they can have just as much as they want  everything belongs to them  

 ain' dat gay   en what dey got to do  huck  

 they don't do nothing!  why  how you talk! they just set around  

 no  is dat so  

 of course it is   they just set around except  maybe  when there's a
war  then they go to the war   but other times they just lazy around  or
go hawking just hawking and sp sh! d' you hear a noise  

we skipped out and looked  but it warn't nothing but the flutter of a
steamboat's wheel away down  coming around the point  so we come back 

 yes   says i   and other times  when things is dull  they fuss with the
parlyment  and if everybody don't go just so he whacks their heads off 
but mostly they hang round the harem  

 roun' de which  

 harem  

 what's de harem  

 the place where he keeps his wives   don't you know about the harem 
solomon had one  he had about a million wives  

 why  yes  dat's so  i i'd done forgot it   a harem's a bo'd'n-house  i
reck'n   mos' likely dey has rackety times in de nussery   en i reck'n de
wives quarrels considable  en dat 'crease de racket   yit dey say
sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'   i doan' take no stock in dat 
bekase why  would a wise man want to live in de mids' er sich a
blim-blammin' all de time   no 'deed he wouldn't   a wise man 'ud take
en buil' a biler-factry  en den he could shet down de biler-factry when
he want to res'  

 well  but he was the wisest man  anyway  because the widow she told me
so  her own self  

 i doan k'yer what de widder say  he warn't no wise man nuther   he had
some er de dad-fetchedes' ways i ever see   does you know 'bout dat chile
dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two  

 yes  the widow told me all about it  

 well  den!  warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'   you jes' take en
look at it a minute   dah's de stump  dah dat's one er de women  heah's
you dat's de yuther one  i's sollermun  en dish yer dollar bill's de
chile   bofe un you claims it   what does i do   does i shin aroun'
mongs' de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill do b'long to  en
han' it over to de right one  all safe en soun'  de way dat anybody dat
had any gumption would   no  i take en whack de bill in two  en give half
un it to you  en de yuther half to de yuther woman   dat's de way
sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile   now i want to ast you   what's
de use er dat half a bill  can't buy noth'n wid it   en what use is a
half a chile   i wouldn' give a dern for a million un um  

 but hang it  jim  you've clean missed the point blame it  you've missed
it a thousand mile  

 who   me   go 'long   doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints   i reck'n i
knows sense when i sees it  en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as dat 
de 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile  de 'spute was 'bout a whole chile 
en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile wid a half
a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain   doan' talk to me
'bout sollermun  huck  i knows him by de back  

 but i tell you you don't get the point  

 blame de point!  i reck'n i knows what i knows   en mine you  de real
pint is down furder it's down deeper   it lays in de way sollermun was
raised   you take a man dat's got on'y one or two chillen  is dat man
gwyne to be waseful o' chillen   no  he ain't  he can't 'ford it   he
know how to value 'em   but you take a man dat's got 'bout five million
chillen runnin' roun' de house  en it's diffunt   he as soon chop a chile
in two as a cat  dey's plenty mo'   a chile er two  mo' er less  warn't
no consekens to sollermun  dad fatch him! 

i never see such a nigger   if he got a notion in his head once  there
warn't no getting it out again   he was the most down on solomon of any
nigger i ever see   so i went to talking about other kings  and let
solomon slide   i told about louis sixteenth that got his head cut off in
france long time ago  and about his little boy the dolphin  that would a
been a king  but they took and shut him up in jail  and some say he died
there 

 po' little chap  

 but some says he got out and got away  and come to america  

 dat's good!  but he'll be pooty lonesome dey ain' no kings here  is
dey  huck  

 no  

 den he cain't git no situation   what he gwyne to do  

 well  i don't know   some of them gets on the police  and some of them
learns people how to talk french  

 why  huck  doan' de french people talk de same way we does  

 no  jim  you couldn't understand a word they said not a single word  

 well  now  i be ding-busted!  how do dat come  

 i don't know  but it's so   i got some of their jabber out of a book 
s'pose a man was to come to you and say polly-voo-franzy what would you
think  

 i wouldn' think nuff'n  i'd take en bust him over de head dat is  if he
warn't white   i wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me dat  

 shucks  it ain't calling you anything   it's only saying  do you know
how to talk french  

 well  den  why couldn't he say it  

 why  he is a-saying it   that's a frenchman's way of saying it  

 well  it's a blame ridicklous way  en i doan' want to hear no mo' 'bout
it   dey ain' no sense in it  

 looky here  jim  does a cat talk like we do  

 no  a cat don't  

 well  does a cow  

 no  a cow don't  nuther  

 does a cat talk like a cow  or a cow talk like a cat  

 no  dey don't  

 it's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each other  ain't
it  

 course  

 and ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk different
from us  

 why  mos' sholy it is  

 well  then  why ain't it natural and right for a frenchman to talk
different from us   you answer me that  

 is a cat a man  huck  

 no  

 well  den  dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man   is a cow a
man  er is a cow a cat  

 no  she ain't either of them  

 well  den  she ain't got no business to talk like either one er the
yuther of 'em   is a frenchman a man  

 yes  

 well  den!  dad blame it  why doan' he talk like a man   you answer me
dat! 

i see it warn't no use wasting words you can't learn a nigger to argue 
so i quit 




we judged that three nights more would fetch us to cairo  at the bottom
of illinois  where the ohio river comes in  and that was what we was
after   we would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the
ohio amongst the free states  and then be out of trouble 

well  the second night a fog begun to come on  and we made for a towhead
to tie to  for it wouldn't do to try to run in a fog  but when i paddled
ahead in the canoe  with the line to make fast  there warn't anything but
little saplings to tie to   i passed the line around one of them right on
the edge of the cut bank  but there was a stiff current  and the raft
come booming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and away she
went   i see the fog closing down  and it made me so sick and scared i
couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me and then there
warn't no raft in sight  you couldn't see twenty yards   i jumped into
the canoe and run back to the stern  and grabbed the paddle and set her
back a stroke   but she didn't come   i was in such a hurry i hadn't
untied her   i got up and tried to untie her  but i was so excited my
hands shook so i couldn't hardly do anything with them 

as soon as i got started i took out after the raft  hot and heavy  right
down the towhead   that was all right as far as it went  but the towhead
warn't sixty yards long  and the minute i flew by the foot of it i shot
out into the solid white fog  and hadn't no more idea which way i was
going than a dead man 

thinks i  it won't do to paddle  first i know i'll run into the bank or a
towhead or something  i got to set still and float  and yet it's mighty
fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time   i
whooped and listened   away down there somewheres i hears a small whoop 
and up comes my spirits   i went tearing after it  listening sharp to
hear it again   the next time it come i see i warn't heading for it  but
heading away to the right of it   and the next time i was heading away to
the left of it and not gaining on it much either  for i was flying
around  this way and that and t'other  but it was going straight ahead
all the time 

i did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan  and beat it all the
time  but he never did  and it was the still places between the whoops
that was making the trouble for me   well  i fought along  and directly i
hears the whoop behind me   i was tangled good now   that was somebody
else's whoop  or else i was turned around 

i throwed the paddle down   i heard the whoop again  it was behind me
yet  but in a different place  it kept coming  and kept changing its
place  and i kept answering  till by and by it was in front of me again 
and i knowed the current had swung the canoe's head down-stream  and i
was all right if that was jim and not some other raftsman hollering   i
couldn't tell nothing about voices in a fog  for nothing don't look
natural nor sound natural in a fog 

the whooping went on  and in about a minute i come a-booming down on a
cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it  and the current throwed me
off to the left and shot by  amongst a lot of snags that fairly roared 
the currrent was tearing by them so swift 

in another second or two it was solid white and still again   i set
perfectly still then  listening to my heart thump  and i reckon i didn't
draw a breath while it thumped a hundred 

i just give up then   i knowed what the matter was   that cut bank was an
island  and jim had gone down t'other side of it   it warn't no towhead
that you could float by in ten minutes   it had the big timber of a
regular island  it might be five or six miles long and more than half a
mile wide 

i kept quiet  with my ears cocked  about fifteen minutes  i reckon   i
was floating along  of course  four or five miles an hour  but you don't
ever think of that   no  you feel like you are laying dead still on the
water  and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don't think to
yourself how fast you're going  but you catch your breath and think  my!
how that snag's tearing along   if you think it ain't dismal and lonesome
out in a fog that way by yourself in the night  you try it once you'll
see 

next  for about a half an hour  i whoops now and then  at last i hears
the answer a long ways off  and tries to follow it  but i couldn't do it 
and directly i judged i'd got into a nest of towheads  for i had little
dim glimpses of them on both sides of me sometimes just a narrow channel
between  and some that i couldn't see i knowed was there because i'd hear
the wash of the current against the old dead brush and trash that hung
over the banks   well  i warn't long loosing the whoops down amongst the
towheads  and i only tried to chase them a little while  anyway  because
it was worse than chasing a jack-o'-lantern   you never knowed a sound
dodge around so  and swap places so quick and so much 

i had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times  to
keep from knocking the islands out of the river  and so i judged the raft
must be butting into the bank every now and then  or else it would get
further ahead and clear out of hearing it was floating a little faster
than what i was 

well  i seemed to be in the open river again by and by  but i couldn't
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres   i reckoned jim had fetched up on a
snag  maybe  and it was all up with him   i was good and tired  so i laid
down in the canoe and said i wouldn't bother no more   i didn't want to
go to sleep  of course  but i was so sleepy i couldn't help it  so i
thought i would take jest one little cat-nap 

but i reckon it was more than a cat-nap  for when i waked up the stars
was shining bright  the fog was all gone  and i was spinning down a big
bend stern first   first i didn't know where i was  i thought i was
dreaming  and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come up
dim out of last week 

it was a monstrous big river here  with the tallest and the thickest kind
of timber on both banks  just a solid wall  as well as i could see by the
stars   i looked away down-stream  and seen a black speck on the water 
i took after it  but when i got to it it warn't nothing but a couple of
sawlogs made fast together   then i see another speck  and chased that 
then another  and this time i was right   it was the raft 

when i got to it jim was setting there with his head down between his
knees  asleep  with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar   the
other oar was smashed off  and the raft was littered up with leaves and
branches and dirt   so she'd had a rough time 

i made fast and laid down under jim's nose on the raft  and began to gap 
and stretch my fists out against jim  and says 

 hello  jim  have i been asleep   why didn't you stir me up  

 goodness gracious  is dat you  huck   en you ain' dead you ain'
drownded you's back agin   it's too good for true  honey  it's too
good for true  lemme look at you chile  lemme feel o' you   no  you ain'
dead! you's back agin  'live en soun'  jis de same ole huck de same ole
huck  thanks to goodness! 

 what's the matter with you  jim   you been a-drinking  

 drinkin'   has i ben a-drinkin'   has i had a chance to be a-drinkin'  

 well  then  what makes you talk so wild  

 how does i talk wild  

 how   why  hain't you been talking about my coming back  and all that
stuff  as if i'd been gone away  

 huck huck finn  you look me in de eye  look me in de eye   hain't you
ben gone away  

 gone away   why  what in the nation do you mean   i hain't been gone
anywheres   where would i go to  

 well  looky here  boss  dey's sumf'n wrong  dey is   is i me  or who is
i  is i heah  or whah is i   now dat's what i wants to know  

 well  i think you're here  plain enough  but i think you're a
tangle-headed old fool  jim  

 i is  is i   well  you answer me dis   didn't you tote out de line in de
canoe fer to make fas' to de tow-head  

 no  i didn't   what tow-head   i hain't see no tow-head  

 you hain't seen no towhead   looky here  didn't de line pull loose en de
raf' go a-hummin' down de river  en leave you en de canoe behine in de
fog  

 what fog  

 why  de fog! de fog dat's been aroun' all night   en didn't you whoop 
en didn't i whoop  tell we got mix' up in de islands en one un us got
los' en t'other one was jis' as good as los'  'kase he didn' know whah he
wuz  en didn't i bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible
time en mos' git drownded   now ain' dat so  boss ain't it so   you
answer me dat  

 well  this is too many for me  jim   i hain't seen no fog  nor no
islands  nor no troubles  nor nothing   i been setting here talking with
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago  and i reckon
i done the same   you couldn't a got drunk in that time  so of course
you've been dreaming  

 dad fetch it  how is i gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes  

 well  hang it all  you did dream it  because there didn't any of it
happen  

 but  huck  it's all jis' as plain to me as  

 it don't make no difference how plain it is  there ain't nothing in it 
i know  because i've been here all the time  

jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes  but set there studying
over it   then he says 

 well  den  i reck'n i did dream it  huck  but dog my cats ef it ain't de
powerfullest dream i ever see   en i hain't ever had no dream b'fo' dat's
tired me like dis one  

 oh  well  that's all right  because a dream does tire a body like
everything sometimes   but this one was a staving dream  tell me all
about it  jim  

so jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through  just as it
happened  only he painted it up considerable   then he said he must start
in and  'terpret  it  because it was sent for a warning   he said the
first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good  but the
current was another man that would get us away from him   the whoops was
warnings that would come to us every now and then  and if we didn't try
hard to make out to understand them they'd just take us into bad luck 
'stead of keeping us out of it   the lot of towheads was troubles we was
going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks 
but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate them  we
would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big clear river 
which was the free states  and wouldn't have no more trouble 

it had clouded up pretty dark just after i got on to the raft  but it was
clearing up again now 

 oh  well  that's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes  jim   i
says   but what does these things stand for  

it was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar   you could
see them first-rate now 

jim looked at the trash  and then looked at me  and back at the trash
again   he had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he couldn't
seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place again right
away   but when he did get the thing straightened around he looked at me
steady without ever smiling  and says 

 what do dey stan' for   i'se gwyne to tell you   when i got all wore out
wid work  en wid de callin' for you  en went to sleep  my heart wuz mos'
broke bekase you wuz los'  en i didn' k'yer no' mo' what become er me en
de raf'   en when i wake up en fine you back agin  all safe en soun'  de
tears come  en i could a got down on my knees en kiss yo' foot  i's so
thankful  en all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could make a fool uv
ole jim wid a lie   dat truck dah is trash  en trash is what people is
dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em ashamed  

then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam  and went in there without
saying anything but that   but that was enough   it made me feel so mean
i could almost kissed his foot to get him to take it back 

it was fifteen minutes before i could work myself up to go and humble
myself to a nigger  but i done it  and i warn't ever sorry for it
afterwards  neither   i didn't do him no more mean tricks  and i wouldn't
done that one if i'd a knowed it would make him feel that way 




we slept most all day  and started out at night  a little ways behind a
monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession   she had
four long sweeps at each end  so we judged she carried as many as thirty
men  likely   she had five big wigwams aboard  wide apart  and an open
camp fire in the middle  and a tall flag-pole at each end   there was a
power of style about her   it amounted to something being a raftsman on
such a craft as that 

we went drifting down into a big bend  and the night clouded up and got
hot   the river was very wide  and was walled with solid timber on both
sides  you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever  or a light   we talked
about cairo  and wondered whether we would know it when we got to it   i
said likely we wouldn't  because i had heard say there warn't but about a
dozen houses there  and if they didn't happen to have them lit up  how
was we going to know we was passing a town   jim said if the two big
rivers joined together there  that would show   but i said maybe we might
think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old
river again  that disturbed jim and me too   so the question was  what
to do   i said  paddle ashore the first time a light showed  and tell
them pap was behind  coming along with a trading-scow  and was a green
hand at the business  and wanted to know how far it was to cairo   jim
thought it was a good idea  so we took a smoke on it and waited 

there warn't nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town  and
not pass it without seeing it   he said he'd be mighty sure to see it 
because he'd be a free man the minute he seen it  but if he missed it
he'd be in a slave country again and no more show for freedom   every
little while he jumps up and says 

 dah she is  

but it warn't   it was jack-o'-lanterns  or lightning bugs  so he set
down again  and went to watching  same as before   jim said it made him
all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom   well  i can
tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish  too  to hear him 
because i begun to get it through my head that he was most free and who
was to blame for it   why  me   i couldn't get that out of my conscience 
no how nor no way  it got to troubling me so i couldn't rest  i couldn't
stay still in one place   it hadn't ever come home to me before  what
this thing was that i was doing   but now it did  and it stayed with me 
and scorched me more and more   i tried to make out to myself that i
warn't to blame  because i didn't run jim off from his rightful owner 
but it warn't no use  conscience up and says  every time   but you knowed
he was running for his freedom  and you could a paddled ashore and told
somebody    that was so i couldn't get around that noway   that was
where it pinched   conscience says to me   what had poor miss watson done
to you that you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and
never say one single word   what did that poor old woman do to you that
you could treat her so mean   why  she tried to learn you your book  she
tried to learn you your manners  she tried to be good to you every way
she knowed how   that's what she done  

i got to feeling so mean and so miserable i most wished i was dead   i
fidgeted up and down the raft  abusing myself to myself  and jim was
fidgeting up and down past me   we neither of us could keep still   every
time he danced around and says   dah's cairo!  it went through me like a
shot  and i thought if it was cairo i reckoned i would die of
miserableness 

jim talked out loud all the time while i was talking to myself   he was
saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free state he
would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent  and when he
got enough he would buy his wife  which was owned on a farm close to
where miss watson lived  and then they would both work to buy the two
children  and if their master wouldn't sell them  they'd get an
ab'litionist to go and steal them 

it most froze me to hear such talk   he wouldn't ever dared to talk such
talk in his life before   just see what a difference it made in him the
minute he judged he was about free   it was according to the old saying 
 give a nigger an inch and he'll take an ell    thinks i  this is what
comes of my not thinking   here was this nigger  which i had as good as
helped to run away  coming right out flat-footed and saying he would
steal his children children that belonged to a man i didn't even know  a
man that hadn't ever done me no harm 

i was sorry to hear jim say that  it was such a lowering of him   my
conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever  until at last i says
to it   let up on me it ain't too late yet i'll paddle ashore at the
first light and tell    i felt easy and happy and light as a feather
right off   all my troubles was gone   i went to looking out sharp for a
light  and sort of singing to myself   by and by one showed   jim sings
out 

 we's safe  huck  we's safe!  jump up and crack yo' heels!  dat's de good
ole cairo at las'  i jis knows it! 

i says 

 i'll take the canoe and go and see  jim   it mightn't be  you know  

he jumped and got the canoe ready  and put his old coat in the bottom for
me to set on  and give me the paddle  and as i shoved off  he says 

 pooty soon i'll be a-shout'n' for joy  en i'll say  it's all on accounts
o' huck  i's a free man  en i couldn't ever ben free ef it hadn' ben for
huck  huck done it   jim won't ever forgit you  huck  you's de bes' fren'
jim's ever had  en you's de only fren' ole jim's got now  

i was paddling off  all in a sweat to tell on him  but when he says this 
it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me   i went along slow
then  and i warn't right down certain whether i was glad i started or
whether i warn't   when i was fifty yards off  jim says 

 dah you goes  de ole true huck  de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his
promise to ole jim  

well  i just felt sick   but i says  i got to do it i can't get out of
it   right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns  and
they stopped and i stopped   one of them says 

 what's that yonder  

 a piece of a raft   i says 

 do you belong on it  

 yes  sir  

 any men on it  

 only one  sir  

 well  there's five niggers run off to-night up yonder  above the head of
the bend   is your man white or black  

i didn't answer up prompt   i tried to  but the words wouldn't come  i
tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it  but i warn't man
enough hadn't the spunk of a rabbit   i see i was weakening  so i just
give up trying  and up and says 

 he's white  

 i reckon we'll go and see for ourselves  

 i wish you would   says i   because it's pap that's there  and maybe
you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is   he's sick and so
is mam and mary ann  

 oh  the devil! we're in a hurry  boy   but i s'pose we've got to   come 
buckle to your paddle  and let's get along  

i buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars   when we had made a
stroke or two  i says 

 pap'll be mighty much obleeged to you  i can tell you   everybody goes
away when i want them to help me tow the raft ashore  and i can't do it
by myself  

 well  that's infernal mean   odd  too   say  boy  what's the matter with
your father  

 it's the a the well  it ain't anything much  

they stopped pulling   it warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft
now  one says 

 boy  that's a lie   what is the matter with your pap   answer up square
now  and it'll be the better for you  

 i will  sir  i will  honest but don't leave us  please   it's the the
 gentlemen  if you'll only pull ahead  and let me heave you the
headline  you won't have to come a-near the raft please do  

 set her back  john  set her back!  says one   they backed water    keep
away  boy keep to looard   confound it  i just expect the wind has
blowed it to us   your pap's got the small-pox  and you know it precious
well   why didn't you come out and say so   do you want to spread it all
over  

 well   says i  a-blubbering   i've told everybody before  and they just
went away and left us  

 poor devil  there's something in that   we are right down sorry for you 
but we well  hang it  we don't want the small-pox  you see   look here 
i'll tell you what to do   don't you try to land by yourself  or you'll
smash everything to pieces   you float along down about twenty miles  and
you'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river   it will be
long after sun-up then  and when you ask for help you tell them your
folks are all down with chills and fever   don't be a fool again  and let
people guess what is the matter   now we're trying to do you a kindness 
so you just put twenty miles between us  that's a good boy   it wouldn't
do any good to land yonder where the light is it's only a wood-yard 
say  i reckon your father's poor  and i'm bound to say he's in pretty
hard luck   here  i'll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this board  and
you get it when it floats by   i feel mighty mean to leave you  but my
kingdom! it won't do to fool with small-pox  don't you see  

 hold on  parker   says the other man   here's a twenty to put on the
board for me   good-bye  boy  you do as mr  parker told you  and you'll
be all right  

 that's so  my boy good-bye  good-bye   if you see any runaway niggers
you get help and nab them  and you can make some money by it  

 good-bye  sir   says i   i won't let no runaway niggers get by me if i
can help it  

they went off and i got aboard the raft  feeling bad and low  because i
knowed very well i had done wrong  and i see it warn't no use for me to
try to learn to do right  a body that don't get started right when he's
little ain't got no show when the pinch comes there ain't nothing to
back him up and keep him to his work  and so he gets beat   then i
thought a minute  and says to myself  hold on  s'pose you'd a done right
and give jim up  would you felt better than what you do now   no  says i 
i'd feel bad i'd feel just the same way i do now   well  then  says i 
what's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do right
and ain't no trouble to do wrong  and the wages is just the same   i was
stuck   i couldn't answer that   so i reckoned i wouldn't bother no more
about it  but after this always do whichever come handiest at the time 

i went into the wigwam  jim warn't there   i looked all around  he warn't
anywhere   i says 

 jim! 

 here i is  huck   is dey out o' sight yit   don't talk loud  

he was in the river under the stern oar  with just his nose out   i told
him they were out of sight  so he come aboard   he says 

 i was a-listenin' to all de talk  en i slips into de river en was gwyne
to shove for sho' if dey come aboard   den i was gwyne to swim to de raf'
agin when dey was gone   but lawsy  how you did fool 'em  huck!  dat wuz
de smartes' dodge!  i tell you  chile  i'spec it save' ole jim ole jim
ain't going to forgit you for dat  honey  

then we talked about the money   it was a pretty good raise twenty
dollars apiece   jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now 
and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free states 
he said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go  but he wished we
was already there 

towards daybreak we tied up  and jim was mighty particular about hiding
the raft good   then he worked all day fixing things in bundles  and
getting all ready to quit rafting 

that night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down
in a left-hand bend 

i went off in the canoe to ask about it   pretty soon i found a man out
in the river with a skiff  setting a trot-line   i ranged up and says 

 mister  is that town cairo  

 cairo  no   you must be a blame' fool  

 what town is it  mister  

 if you want to know  go and find out   if you stay here botherin' around
me for about a half a minute longer you'll get something you won't want  

i paddled to the raft   jim was awful disappointed  but i said never
mind  cairo would be the next place  i reckoned 

we passed another town before daylight  and i was going out again  but it
was high ground  so i didn't go   no high ground about cairo  jim said 
i had forgot it   we laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable close to
the left-hand bank   i begun to suspicion something   so did jim   i
says 

 maybe we went by cairo in the fog that night  

he says 

 doan' le's talk about it  huck   po' niggers can't have no luck   i
awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work  

 i wish i'd never seen that snake-skin  jim i do wish i'd never laid
eyes on it  

 it ain't yo' fault  huck  you didn' know   don't you blame yo'self 'bout
it  

when it was daylight  here was the clear ohio water inshore  sure enough 
and outside was the old regular muddy!  so it was all up with cairo 

we talked it all over   it wouldn't do to take to the shore  we couldn't
take the raft up the stream  of course   there warn't no way but to wait
for dark  and start back in the canoe and take the chances   so we slept
all day amongst the cottonwood thicket  so as to be fresh for the work 
and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone!

we didn't say a word for a good while   there warn't anything to say   we
both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin  so
what was the use to talk about it   it would only look like we was
finding fault  and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck and keep
on fetching it  too  till we knowed enough to keep still 

by and by we talked about what we better do  and found there warn't no
way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy a
canoe to go back in   we warn't going to borrow it when there warn't
anybody around  the way pap would do  for that might set people after us 

so we shoved out after dark on the raft 

anybody that don't believe yet that it's foolishness to handle a
snake-skin  after all that that snake-skin done for us  will believe
it now if they read on and see what more it done for us 

the place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore   but we
didn't see no rafts laying up  so we went along during three hours and
more   well  the night got gray and ruther thick  which is the next
meanest thing to fog   you can't tell the shape of the river  and you
can't see no distance  it got to be very late and still  and then along
comes a steamboat up the river   we lit the lantern  and judged she would
see it   up-stream boats didn't generly come close to us  they go out and
follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs  but nights like
this they bull right up the channel against the whole river 

we could hear her pounding along  but we didn't see her good till she was
close   she aimed right for us   often they do that and try to see how
close they can come without touching  sometimes the wheel bites off a
sweep  and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs  and thinks he's
mighty smart   well  here she comes  and we said she was going to try and
shave us  but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit   she was a big
one  and she was coming in a hurry  too  looking like a black cloud with
rows of glow-worms around it  but all of a sudden she bulged out  big and
scary  with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like red-hot
teeth  and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right over us   there
was a yell at us  and a jingling of bells to stop the engines  a powwow
of cussing  and whistling of steam and as jim went overboard on one side
and i on the other  she come smashing straight through the raft 

i dived and i aimed to find the bottom  too  for a thirty-foot wheel had
got to go over me  and i wanted it to have plenty of room   i could
always stay under water a minute  this time i reckon i stayed under a
minute and a half   then i bounced for the top in a hurry  for i was
nearly busting   i popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of
my nose  and puffed a bit   of course there was a booming current  and of
course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she stopped
them  for they never cared much for raftsmen  so now she was churning
along up the river  out of sight in the thick weather  though i could
hear her 

i sung out for jim about a dozen times  but i didn't get any answer  so i
grabbed a plank that touched me while i was  treading water   and struck
out for shore  shoving it ahead of me   but i made out to see that the
drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore  which meant that i
was in a crossing  so i changed off and went that way 

it was one of these long  slanting  two-mile crossings  so i was a good
long time in getting over   i made a safe landing  and clumb up the bank 
i couldn't see but a little ways  but i went poking along over rough
ground for a quarter of a mile or more  and then i run across a big
old-fashioned double log-house before i noticed it   i was going to rush
by and get away  but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and
barking at me  and i knowed better than to move another peg 




in about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his head
out  and says 

 be done  boys!  who's there  

i says 

 it's me  

 who's me  

 george jackson  sir  

 what do you want  

 i don't want nothing  sir   i only want to go along by  but the dogs
won't let me  

 what are you prowling around here this time of night for hey  

 i warn't prowling around  sir  i fell overboard off of the steamboat  

 oh  you did  did you   strike a light there  somebody   what did you say
your name was  

 george jackson  sir   i'm only a boy  

 look here  if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid nobody'll
hurt you   but don't try to budge  stand right where you are   rouse out
bob and tom  some of you  and fetch the guns   george jackson  is there
anybody with you  

 no  sir  nobody  

i heard the people stirring around in the house now  and see a light 
the man sung out 

 snatch that light away  betsy  you old fool ain't you got any sense 
put it on the floor behind the front door   bob  if you and tom are
ready  take your places  

 all ready  

 now  george jackson  do you know the shepherdsons  

 no  sir  i never heard of them  

 well  that may be so  and it mayn't   now  all ready   step forward 
george jackson   and mind  don't you hurry come mighty slow   if there's
anybody with you  let him keep back if he shows himself he'll be shot 
come along now   come slow  push the door open yourself just enough to
squeeze in  d' you hear  

i didn't hurry  i couldn't if i'd a wanted to   i took one slow step at a
time and there warn't a sound  only i thought i could hear my heart   the
dogs were as still as the humans  but they followed a little behind me 
when i got to the three log doorsteps i heard them unlocking and
unbarring and unbolting   i put my hand on the door and pushed it a
little and a little more till somebody said   there  that's enough put
your head in   i done it  but i judged they would take it off 

the candle was on the floor  and there they all was  looking at me  and
me at them  for about a quarter of a minute   three big men with guns
pointed at me  which made me wince  i tell you  the oldest  gray and
about sixty  the other two thirty or more all of them fine and handsome
 and the sweetest old gray-headed lady  and back of her two young women
which i couldn't see right well   the old gentleman says 

 there  i reckon it's all right   come in  

as soon as i was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it
and bolted it  and told the young men to come in with their guns  and
they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor  and
got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front windows
 there warn't none on the side   they held the candle  and took a good
look at me  and all said   why  he ain't a shepherdson no  there ain't
any shepherdson about him    then the old man said he hoped i wouldn't
mind being searched for arms  because he didn't mean no harm by it it
was only to make sure   so he didn't pry into my pockets  but only felt
outside with his hands  and said it was all right   he told me to make
myself easy and at home  and tell all about myself  but the old lady
says 

 why  bless you  saul  the poor thing's as wet as he can be  and don't
you reckon it may be he's hungry  

 true for you  rachel i forgot  

so the old lady says 

 betsy  (this was a nigger woman)   you fly around and get him something
to eat as quick as you can  poor thing  and one of you girls go and wake
up buck and tell him oh  here he is himself   buck  take this little
stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of
yours that's dry  

buck looked about as old as me thirteen or fourteen or along there 
though he was a little bigger than me   he hadn't on anything but a
shirt  and he was very frowzy-headed   he came in gaping and digging one
fist into his eyes  and he was dragging a gun along with the other one 
he says 

 ain't they no shepherdsons around  

they said  no  'twas a false alarm 

 well   he says   if they'd a ben some  i reckon i'd a got one  

they all laughed  and bob says 

 why  buck  they might have scalped us all  you've been so slow in
coming  

 well  nobody come after me  and it ain't right i'm always kept down  i
don't get no show  

 never mind  buck  my boy   says the old man   you'll have show enough 
all in good time  don't you fret about that   go 'long with you now  and
do as your mother told you  

when we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a
roundabout and pants of his  and i put them on   while i was at it he
asked me what my name was  but before i could tell him he started to tell
me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods day
before yesterday  and he asked me where moses was when the candle went
out   i said i didn't know  i hadn't heard about it before  no way 

 well  guess   he says 

 how'm i going to guess   says i   when i never heard tell of it before  

 but you can guess  can't you   it's just as easy  

 which candle    i says 

 why  any candle   he says 

 i don't know where he was   says i   where was he  

 why  he was in the dark!  that's where he was! 

 well  if you knowed where he was  what did you ask me for  

 why  blame it  it's a riddle  don't you see   say  how long are you
going to stay here   you got to stay always   we can just have booming
times they don't have no school now   do you own a dog   i've got a
dog and he'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in   do
you like to comb up sundays  and all that kind of foolishness   you bet i
don't  but ma she makes me   confound these ole britches!  i reckon i'd
better put 'em on  but i'd ruther not  it's so warm   are you all ready 
all right   come along  old hoss  

cold corn-pone  cold corn-beef  butter and buttermilk that is what they
had for me down there  and there ain't nothing better that ever i've come
across yet   buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes  except the
nigger woman  which was gone  and the two young women   they all smoked
and talked  and i eat and talked   the young women had quilts around
them  and their hair down their backs   they all asked me questions  and
i told them how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm
down at the bottom of arkansaw  and my sister mary ann run off and got
married and never was heard of no more  and bill went to hunt them and he
warn't heard of no more  and tom and mort died  and then there warn't
nobody but just me and pap left  and he was just trimmed down to nothing 
on account of his troubles  so when he died i took what there was left 
because the farm didn't belong to us  and started up the river  deck
passage  and fell overboard  and that was how i come to be here   so they
said i could have a home there as long as i wanted it   then it was most
daylight and everybody went to bed  and i went to bed with buck  and when
i waked up in the morning  drat it all  i had forgot what my name was 
so i laid there about an hour trying to think  and when buck waked up i
says 

 can you spell  buck  

 yes   he says 

 i bet you can't spell my name   says i 

 i bet you what you dare i can   says he 

 all right   says i   go ahead  

 g-e-o-r-g-e j-a-x-o-n there now   he says 

 well   says i   you done it  but i didn't think you could   it ain't no
slouch of a name to spell right off without studying  

i set it down  private  because somebody might want me to spell it next 
and so i wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like i was used to
it 

it was a mighty nice family  and a mighty nice house  too   i hadn't seen
no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much
style   it didn't have an iron latch on the front door  nor a wooden one
with a buckskin string  but a brass knob to turn  the same as houses in
town  there warn't no bed in the parlor  nor a sign of a bed  but heaps
of parlors in towns has beds in them   there was a big fireplace that was
bricked on the bottom  and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring
water on them and scrubbing them with another brick  sometimes they wash
them over with red water-paint that they call spanish-brown  same as they
do in town   they had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw-log 
there was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece  with a picture of a
town painted on the bottom half of the glass front  and a round place in
the middle of it for the sun  and you could see the pendulum swinging
behind it   it was beautiful to hear that clock tick  and sometimes when
one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in
good shape  she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before she
got tuckered out   they wouldn't took any money for her 

well  there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock  made
out of something like chalk  and painted up gaudy   by one of the parrots
was a cat made of crockery  and a crockery dog by the other  and when you
pressed down on them they squeaked  but didn't open their mouths nor look
different nor interested   they squeaked through underneath   there was a
couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things   on
the table in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery
basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it 
which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is  but
they warn't real because you could see where pieces had got chipped off
and showed the white chalk  or whatever it was  underneath 

this table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth  with a red and
blue spread-eagle painted on it  and a painted border all around   it
come all the way from philadelphia  they said   there was some books 
too  piled up perfectly exact  on each corner of the table   one was a
big family bible full of pictures   one was pilgrim's progress  about a
man that left his family  it didn't say why   i read considerable in it
now and then   the statements was interesting  but tough   another was
friendship's offering  full of beautiful stuff and poetry  but i didn't
read the poetry   another was henry clay's speeches  and another was dr 
gunn's family medicine  which told you all about what to do if a body was
sick or dead   there was a hymn book  and a lot of other books   and
there was nice split-bottom chairs  and perfectly sound  too not bagged
down in the middle and busted  like an old basket 

they had pictures hung on the walls mainly washingtons and lafayettes 
and battles  and highland marys  and one called  signing the
declaration   there was some that they called crayons  which one of the
daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only fifteen
years old   they was different from any pictures i ever see before
 blacker  mostly  than is common   one was a woman in a slim black dress 
belted small under the armpits  with bulges like a cabbage in the middle
of the sleeves  and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a black veil 
and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape  and very wee black
slippers  like a chisel  and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on
her right elbow  under a weeping willow  and her other hand hanging down
her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule  and underneath the
picture it said  shall i never see thee more alas    another one was a
young lady with her hair all combed up straight to the top of her head 
and knotted there in front of a comb like a chair-back  and she was
crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her
other hand with its heels up  and underneath the picture it said  i shall
never hear thy sweet chirrup more alas    there was one where a young
lady was at a window looking up at the moon  and tears running down her
cheeks  and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax
showing on one edge of it  and she was mashing a locket with a chain to
it against her mouth  and underneath the picture it said  and art thou
gone yes thou art gone alas    these was all nice pictures  i reckon  but
i didn't somehow seem to take to them  because if ever i was down a
little they always give me the fan-tods   everybody was sorry she died 
because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do  and a body
could see by what she had done what they had lost   but i reckoned that
with her disposition she was having a better time in the graveyard   she
was at work on what they said was her greatest picture when she took
sick  and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed to
live till she got it done  but she never got the chance   it was a
picture of a young woman in a long white gown  standing on the rail of a
bridge all ready to jump off  with her hair all down her back  and
looking up to the moon  with the tears running down her face  and she had
two arms folded across her breast  and two arms stretched out in front 
and two more reaching up towards the moon and the idea was to see which
pair would look best  and then scratch out all the other arms  but  as i
was saying  she died before she got her mind made up  and now they kept
this picture over the head of the bed in her room  and every time her
birthday come they hung flowers on it   other times it was hid with a
little curtain   the young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice
sweet face  but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery 
seemed to me 

this young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive  and used to paste
obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the
presbyterian observer  and write poetry after them out of her own head 
it was very good poetry   this is what she wrote about a boy by the name
of stephen dowling bots that fell down a well and was drownded 

ode to stephen dowling bots  dec'd

and did young stephen sicken  and did young stephen die  and did the sad
hearts thicken  and did the mourners cry 

no  such was not the fate of young stephen dowling bots  though sad
hearts round him thickened  'twas not from sickness' shots 

no whooping-cough did rack his frame  nor measles drear with spots  not
these impaired the sacred name of stephen dowling bots 

despised love struck not with woe that head of curly knots  nor stomach
troubles laid him low  young stephen dowling bots 

o no   then list with tearful eye  whilst i his fate do tell  his soul
did from this cold world fly by falling down a well 

they got him out and emptied him  alas it was too late  his spirit was
gone for to sport aloft in the realms of the good and great 

if emmeline grangerford could make poetry like that before she was
fourteen  there ain't no telling what she could a done by and by   buck
said she could rattle off poetry like nothing   she didn't ever have to
stop to think   he said she would slap down a line  and if she couldn't
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down
another one  and go ahead  she warn't particular  she could write about
anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful 
every time a man died  or a woman died  or a child died  she would be on
hand with her  tribute  before he was cold   she called them tributes 
the neighbors said it was the doctor first  then emmeline  then the
undertaker the undertaker never got in ahead of emmeline but once  and
then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person's name  which was
whistler   she warn't ever the same after that  she never complained  but
she kinder pined away and did not live long   poor thing  many's the time
i made myself go up to the little room that used to be hers and get out
her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been
aggravating me and i had soured on her a little   i liked all that
family  dead ones and all  and warn't going to let anything come between
us   poor emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when she was
alive  and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody to make some
about her now she was gone  so i tried to sweat out a verse or two
myself  but i couldn't seem to make it go somehow   they kept emmeline's
room trim and nice  and all the things fixed in it just the way she liked
to have them when she was alive  and nobody ever slept there   the old
lady took care of the room herself  though there was plenty of niggers 
and she sewed there a good deal and read her bible there mostly 

well  as i was saying about the parlor  there was beautiful curtains on
the windows   white  with pictures painted on them of castles with vines
all down the walls  and cattle coming down to drink   there was a little
old piano  too  that had tin pans in it  i reckon  and nothing was ever
so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing  the last link is broken  and
play  the battle of prague  on it   the walls of all the rooms was
plastered  and most had carpets on the floors  and the whole house was
whitewashed on the outside 

it was a double house  and the big open place betwixt them was roofed and
floored  and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the day 
and it was a cool  comfortable place   nothing couldn't be better   and
warn't the cooking good  and just bushels of it too!




col   grangerford was a gentleman  you see   he was a gentleman all over 
and so was his family   he was well born  as the saying is  and that's
worth as much in a man as it is in a horse  so the widow douglas said 
and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy in our town 
and pap he always said it  too  though he warn't no more quality than a
mudcat himself   col   grangerford was very tall and very slim  and had a
darkish-paly complexion  not a sign of red in it anywheres  he was clean
shaved every morning all over his thin face  and he had the thinnest kind
of lips  and the thinnest kind of nostrils  and a high nose  and heavy
eyebrows  and the blackest kind of eyes  sunk so deep back that they
seemed like they was looking out of caverns at you  as you may say   his
forehead was high  and his hair was black and straight and hung to his
shoulders  his hands was long and thin  and every day of his life he put
on a clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen so
white it hurt your eyes to look at it  and on sundays he wore a blue
tail-coat with brass buttons on it   he carried a mahogany cane with a
silver head to it   there warn't no frivolishness about him  not a bit 
and he warn't ever loud   he was as kind as he could be you could feel
that  you know  and so you had confidence   sometimes he smiled  and it
was good to see  but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-pole 
and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows  you
wanted to climb a tree first  and find out what the matter was
afterwards   he didn't ever have to tell anybody to mind their manners
 everybody was always good-mannered where he was   everybody loved to have
him around  too  he was sunshine most always i mean he made it seem
like good weather   when he turned into a cloudbank it was awful dark for
half a minute  and that was enough  there wouldn't nothing go wrong again
for a week 

when him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got up
out of their chairs and give them good-day  and didn't set down again
till they had set down   then tom and bob went to the sideboard where the
decanter was  and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him  and he
held it in his hand and waited till tom's and bob's was mixed  and then
they bowed and said   our duty to you  sir  and madam   and they bowed
the least bit in the world and said thank you  and so they drank  all
three  and bob and tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and the
mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers  and give
it to me and buck  and we drank to the old people too 

bob was the oldest and tom next tall  beautiful men with very broad
shoulders and brown faces  and long black hair and black eyes   they
dressed in white linen from head to foot  like the old gentleman  and
wore broad panama hats 

then there was miss charlotte  she was twenty-five  and tall and proud
and grand  but as good as she could be when she warn't stirred up  but
when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks  like
her father   she was beautiful 

so was her sister  miss sophia  but it was a different kind   she was
gentle and sweet like a dove  and she was only twenty 

each person had their own nigger to wait on them buck too   my nigger
had a monstrous easy time  because i warn't used to having anybody do
anything for me  but buck's was on the jump most of the time 

this was all there was of the family now  but there used to be more
 three sons  they got killed  and emmeline that died 

the old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers 
sometimes a stack of people would come there  horseback  from ten or
fifteen mile around  and stay five or six days  and have such junketings
round about and on the river  and dances and picnics in the woods
daytimes  and balls at the house nights   these people was mostly
kinfolks of the family   the men brought their guns with them   it was a
handsome lot of quality  i tell you 

there was another clan of aristocracy around there five or six families
 mostly of the name of shepherdson   they was as high-toned and well
born and rich and grand as the tribe of grangerfords   the shepherdsons
and grangerfords used the same steamboat landing  which was about two
mile above our house  so sometimes when i went up there with a lot of our
folks i used to see a lot of the shepherdsons there on their fine horses 

one day buck and me was away out in the woods hunting  and heard a horse
coming   we was crossing the road   buck says 

 quick!  jump for the woods! 

we done it  and then peeped down the woods through the leaves   pretty
soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road  setting his horse
easy and looking like a soldier   he had his gun across his pommel   i
had seen him before   it was young harney shepherdson   i heard buck's
gun go off at my ear  and harney's hat tumbled off from his head   he
grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was hid   but we
didn't wait   we started through the woods on a run   the woods warn't
thick  so i looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet  and twice i seen
harney cover buck with his gun  and then he rode away the way he come to
get his hat  i reckon  but i couldn't see   we never stopped running till
we got home   the old gentleman's eyes blazed a minute 'twas pleasure 
mainly  i judged then his face sort of smoothed down  and he says 
kind of gentle 

 i don't like that shooting from behind a bush   why didn't you step into
the road  my boy  

 the shepherdsons don't  father   they always take advantage  

miss charlotte she held her head up like a queen while buck was telling
his tale  and her nostrils spread and her eyes snapped   the two young
men looked dark  but never said nothing   miss sophia she turned pale 
but the color come back when she found the man warn't hurt 

soon as i could get buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by
ourselves  i says 

 did you want to kill him  buck  

 well  i bet i did  

 what did he do to you  

 him   he never done nothing to me  

 well  then  what did you want to kill him for  

 why  nothing only it's on account of the feud  

 what's a feud  

 why  where was you raised   don't you know what a feud is  

 never heard of it before tell me about it  

 well   says buck   a feud is this way   a man has a quarrel with another
man  and kills him  then that other man's brother kills him  then the
other brothers  on both sides  goes for one another  then the cousins
chip in and by and by everybody's killed off  and there ain't no more
feud   but it's kind of slow  and takes a long time  

 has this one been going on long  buck  

 well  i should reckon!  it started thirty year ago  or som'ers along
there   there was trouble 'bout something  and then a lawsuit to settle
it  and the suit went agin one of the men  and so he up and shot the man
that won the suit which he would naturally do  of course   anybody
would  

 what was the trouble about  buck  land  

 i reckon maybe i don't know  

 well  who done the shooting   was it a grangerford or a shepherdson  

 laws  how do i know   it was so long ago  

 don't anybody know  

 oh  yes  pa knows  i reckon  and some of the other old people  but they
don't know now what the row was about in the first place  

 has there been many killed  buck  

 yes  right smart chance of funerals   but they don't always kill   pa's
got a few buckshot in him  but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh much 
anyway   bob's been carved up some with a bowie  and tom's been hurt once
or twice  

 has anybody been killed this year  buck  

 yes  we got one and they got one   'bout three months ago my cousin bud 
fourteen year old  was riding through the woods on t'other side of the
river  and didn't have no weapon with him  which was blame' foolishness 
and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind him  and sees
old baldy shepherdson a-linkin' after him with his gun in his hand and
his white hair a-flying in the wind  and 'stead of jumping off and taking
to the brush  bud 'lowed he could out-run him  so they had it  nip and
tuck  for five mile or more  the old man a-gaining all the time  so at
last bud seen it warn't any use  so he stopped and faced around so as to
have the bullet holes in front  you know  and the old man he rode up and
shot him down   but he didn't git much chance to enjoy his luck  for
inside of a week our folks laid him out  

 i reckon that old man was a coward  buck  

 i reckon he warn't a coward   not by a blame' sight   there ain't a
coward amongst them shepherdsons not a one   and there ain't no cowards
amongst the grangerfords either   why  that old man kep' up his end in a
fight one day for half an hour against three grangerfords  and come out
winner   they was all a-horseback  he lit off of his horse and got behind
a little woodpile  and kep' his horse before him to stop the bullets  but
the grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around the old man 
and peppered away at him  and he peppered away at them   him and his
horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled  but the grangerfords had
to be fetched home and one of 'em was dead  and another died the next
day   no  sir  if a body's out hunting for cowards he don't want to fool
away any time amongst them shepherdsons  becuz they don't breed any of
that kind  

next sunday we all went to church  about three mile  everybody
a-horseback  the men took their guns along  so did buck  and kept them
between their knees or stood them handy against the wall   the
shepherdsons done the same   it was pretty ornery preaching all about
brotherly love  and such-like tiresomeness  but everybody said it was a
good sermon  and they all talked it over going home  and had such a
powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and
preforeordestination  and i don't know what all  that it did seem to me
to be one of the roughest sundays i had run across yet 

about an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around  some in their
chairs and some in their rooms  and it got to be pretty dull   buck and a
dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep   i went up to
our room  and judged i would take a nap myself   i found that sweet miss
sophia standing in her door  which was next to ours  and she took me in
her room and shut the door very soft  and asked me if i liked her  and i
said i did  and she asked me if i would do something for her and not tell
anybody  and i said i would   then she said she'd forgot her testament 
and left it in the seat at church between two other books  and would i
slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her  and not say nothing to
nobody   i said i would  so i slid out and slipped off up the road  and
there warn't anybody at the church  except maybe a hog or two  for there
warn't any lock on the door  and hogs likes a puncheon floor in
summer-time because it's cool   if you notice  most folks don't go
to church only when they've got to  but a hog is different 

says i to myself  something's up  it ain't natural for a girl to be in
such a sweat about a testament   so i give it a shake  and out drops a
little piece of paper with  half-past two  wrote on it with a pencil   i
ransacked it  but couldn't find anything else   i couldn't make anything
out of that  so i put the paper in the book again  and when i got home
and upstairs there was miss sophia in her door waiting for me   she
pulled me in and shut the door  then she looked in the testament till she
found the paper  and as soon as she read it she looked glad  and before a
body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze  and said i was the
best boy in the world  and not to tell anybody   she was mighty red in
the face for a minute  and her eyes lighted up  and it made her powerful
pretty   i was a good deal astonished  but when i got my breath i asked
her what the paper was about  and she asked me if i had read it  and i
said no  and she asked me if i could read writing  and i told her  no 
only coarse-hand   and then she said the paper warn't anything but a
book-mark to keep her place  and i might go and play now 

i went off down to the river  studying over this thing  and pretty soon i
noticed that my nigger was following along behind   when we was out of
sight of the house he looked back and around a second  and then comes
a-running  and says 

 mars jawge  if you'll come down into de swamp i'll show you a whole
stack o' water-moccasins  

thinks i  that's mighty curious  he said that yesterday   he oughter know
a body don't love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for them 
what is he up to  anyway   so i says 

 all right  trot ahead  

i followed a half a mile  then he struck out over the swamp  and waded
ankle deep as much as another half-mile   we come to a little flat piece
of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines  and
he says 

 you shove right in dah jist a few steps  mars jawge  dah's whah dey is 
i's seed 'm befo'  i don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'  

then he slopped right along and went away  and pretty soon the trees hid
him   i poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch as
big as a bedroom all hung around with vines  and found a man laying there
asleep and  by jings  it was my old jim!

i waked him up  and i reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to him
to see me again  but it warn't   he nearly cried he was so glad  but he
warn't surprised   said he swum along behind me that night  and heard me
yell every time  but dasn't answer  because he didn't want nobody to pick
him up and take him into slavery again   says he 

 i got hurt a little  en couldn't swim fas'  so i wuz a considable ways
behine you towards de las'  when you landed i reck'ned i could ketch up
wid you on de lan' 'dout havin' to shout at you  but when i see dat house
i begin to go slow   i 'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you i wuz
'fraid o' de dogs  but when it 'uz all quiet agin i knowed you's in de
house  so i struck out for de woods to wait for day   early in de mawnin'
some er de niggers come along  gwyne to de fields  en dey tuk me en
showed me dis place  whah de dogs can't track me on accounts o' de water 
en dey brings me truck to eat every night  en tells me how you's a-gitt'n
along  

 why didn't you tell my jack to fetch me here sooner  jim  

 well  'twarn't no use to 'sturb you  huck  tell we could do sumfn but
we's all right now   i ben a-buyin' pots en pans en vittles  as i got a
chanst  en a-patchin' up de raf' nights when  

 what raft  jim  

 our ole raf'  

 you mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders  

 no  she warn't   she was tore up a good deal one en' of her was  but
dey warn't no great harm done  on'y our traps was mos' all los'   ef we
hadn' dive' so deep en swum so fur under water  en de night hadn' ben so
dark  en we warn't so sk'yerd  en ben sich punkin-heads  as de sayin' is 
we'd a seed de raf'   but it's jis' as well we didn't  'kase now she's
all fixed up agin mos' as good as new  en we's got a new lot o' stuff  in
de place o' what 'uz los'  

 why  how did you get hold of the raft again  jim did you catch her  

 how i gwyne to ketch her en i out in de woods   no  some er de niggers
foun' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben'  en dey hid her in a
crick 'mongst de willows  en dey wuz so much jawin' 'bout which un 'um
she b'long to de mos' dat i come to heah 'bout it pooty soon  so i ups en
settles de trouble by tellin' 'um she don't b'long to none uv um  but to
you en me  en i ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman's
propaty  en git a hid'n for it   den i gin 'm ten cents apiece  en dey
'uz mighty well satisfied  en wisht some mo' raf's 'ud come along en make
'm rich agin  dey's mighty good to me  dese niggers is  en whatever i
wants 'm to do fur me i doan' have to ast 'm twice  honey   dat jack's a
good nigger  en pooty smart  

 yes  he is   he ain't ever told me you was here  told me to come  and
he'd show me a lot of water-moccasins   if anything happens he ain't
mixed up in it   he can say he never seen us together  and it 'll be the
truth  

i don't want to talk much about the next day   i reckon i'll cut it
pretty short   i waked up about dawn  and was a-going to turn over and go
to sleep again when i noticed how still it was didn't seem to be anybody
stirring   that warn't usual   next i noticed that buck was up and gone 
well  i gets up  a-wondering  and goes down stairs nobody around 
everything as still as a mouse   just the same outside   thinks i  what
does it mean   down by the wood-pile i comes across my jack  and says 

 what's it all about  

says he 

 don't you know  mars jawge  

 no   says i   i don't  

 well  den  miss sophia's run off! 'deed she has   she run off in de
night some time nobody don't know jis' when  run off to get married to
dat young harney shepherdson  you know leastways  so dey 'spec   de
fambly foun' it out 'bout half an hour ago maybe a little mo' en' i
tell you dey warn't no time los'   sich another hurryin' up guns en
hosses you never see!  de women folks has gone for to stir up de
relations  en ole mars saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river
road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him 'fo' he kin git acrost
de river wid miss sophia   i reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty rough
times  

 buck went off 'thout waking me up  

 well  i reck'n he did!  dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it   mars buck
he loaded up his gun en 'lowed he's gwyne to fetch home a shepherdson or
bust  well  dey'll be plenty un 'm dah  i reck'n  en you bet you he'll
fetch one ef he gits a chanst  

i took up the river road as hard as i could put   by and by i begin to
hear guns a good ways off   when i came in sight of the log store and the
woodpile where the steamboats lands i worked along under the trees and
brush till i got to a good place  and then i clumb up into the forks of a
cottonwood that was out of reach  and watched   there was a wood-rank
four foot high a little ways in front of the tree  and first i was going
to hide behind that  but maybe it was luckier i didn't 

there was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open
place before the log store  cussing and yelling  and trying to get at a
couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the
steamboat landing  but they couldn't come it   every time one of them
showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at   the two
boys was squatting back to back behind the pile  so they could watch both
ways 

by and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling   they started
riding towards the store  then up gets one of the boys  draws a steady
bead over the wood-rank  and drops one of them out of his saddle   all
the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started
to carry him to the store  and that minute the two boys started on the
run   they got half way to the tree i was in before the men noticed 
then the men see them  and jumped on their horses and took out after
them   they gained on the boys  but it didn't do no good  the boys had
too good a start  they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree 
and slipped in behind it  and so they had the bulge on the men again 
one of the boys was buck  and the other was a slim young chap about
nineteen years old 

the men ripped around awhile  and then rode away   as soon as they was
out of sight i sung out to buck and told him   he didn't know what to
make of my voice coming out of the tree at first   he was awful
surprised   he told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the men
come in sight again  said they was up to some devilment or other
 wouldn't be gone long   i wished i was out of that tree  but i dasn't
come down   buck begun to cry and rip  and 'lowed that him and his cousin
joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this day yet   he
said his father and his two brothers was killed  and two or three of the
enemy   said the shepherdsons laid for them in ambush   buck said his
father and brothers ought to waited for their relations the shepherdsons
was too strong for them   i asked him what was become of young harney and
miss sophia   he said they'd got across the river and was safe   i was
glad of that  but the way buck did take on because he didn't manage to
kill harney that day he shot at him i hain't ever heard anything like
it 

all of a sudden  bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns the men had
slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their
horses!  the boys jumped for the river both of them hurt and as they
swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and
singing out   kill them  kill them!   it made me so sick i most fell out
of the tree   i ain't a-going to tell all that happened it would make me
sick again if i was to do that   i wished i hadn't ever come ashore that
night to see such things   i ain't ever going to get shut of them lots
of times i dream about them 

i stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark  afraid to come down 
sometimes i heard guns away off in the woods  and twice i seen little
gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns  so i reckoned the
trouble was still a-going on   i was mighty downhearted  so i made up my
mind i wouldn't ever go anear that house again  because i reckoned i was
to blame  somehow  i judged that that piece of paper meant that miss
sophia was to meet harney somewheres at half-past two and run off  and i
judged i ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way
she acted  and then maybe he would a locked her up  and this awful mess
wouldn't ever happened 

when i got down out of the tree i crept along down the river bank a
piece  and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water  and
tugged at them till i got them ashore  then i covered up their faces  and
got away as quick as i could   i cried a little when i was covering up
buck's face  for he was mighty good to me 

it was just dark now   i never went near the house  but struck through
the woods and made for the swamp   jim warn't on his island  so i tramped
off in a hurry for the crick  and crowded through the willows  red-hot to
jump aboard and get out of that awful country   the raft was gone!  my
souls  but i was scared!  i couldn't get my breath for most a minute 
then i raised a yell   a voice not twenty-five foot from me says 

 good lan'! is dat you  honey   doan' make no noise  

it was jim's voice nothing ever sounded so good before   i run along the
bank a piece and got aboard  and jim he grabbed me and hugged me  he was
so glad to see me   he says 

 laws bless you  chile  i 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin   jack's
been heah  he say he reck'n you's ben shot  kase you didn' come home no
mo'  so i's jes' dis minute a startin' de raf' down towards de mouf er de
crick  so's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as jack comes
agin en tells me for certain you is dead   lawsy  i's mighty glad to git
you back again  honey  

i says 

 all right that's mighty good  they won't find me  and they'll think
i've been killed  and floated down the river there's something up there
that 'll help them think so so don't you lose no time  jim  but just
shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can  

i never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the
middle of the mississippi   then we hung up our signal lantern  and
judged that we was free and safe once more   i hadn't had a bite to eat
since yesterday  so jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk  and
pork and cabbage and greens there ain't nothing in the world so good
when it's cooked right and whilst i eat my supper we talked and had a
good time   i was powerful glad to get away from the feuds  and so was
jim to get away from the swamp   we said there warn't no home like a
raft  after all   other places do seem so cramped up and smothery  but a
raft don't   you feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft 




two or three days and nights went by  i reckon i might say they swum by 
they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely   here is the way we put
in the time   it was a monstrous big river down there sometimes a mile
and a half wide  we run nights  and laid up and hid daytimes  soon as
night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up nearly always in
the dead water under a towhead  and then cut young cottonwoods and
willows  and hid the raft with them   then we set out the lines   next we
slid into the river and had a swim  so as to freshen up and cool off 
then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep 
and watched the daylight come   not a sound anywheres perfectly still
 just like the whole world was asleep  only sometimes the bullfrogs
a-cluttering  maybe   the first thing to see  looking away over the water 
was a kind of dull line that was the woods on t'other side  you couldn't
make nothing else out  then a pale place in the sky  then more paleness
spreading around  then the river softened up away off  and warn't black
any more  but gray  you could see little dark spots drifting along ever
so far away trading scows  and such things  and long black streaks
 rafts  sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking  or jumbled up voices 
it was so still  and sounds come so far  and by and by you could see a
streak on the water which you know by the look of the streak that there's
a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and makes that streak
look that way  and you see the mist curl up off of the water  and the
east reddens up  and the river  and you make out a log-cabin in the edge
of the woods  away on the bank on t'other side of the river  being a
woodyard  likely  and piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog through
it anywheres  then the nice breeze springs up  and comes fanning you from
over there  so cool and fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods
and the flowers  but sometimes not that way  because they've left dead
fish laying around  gars and such  and they do get pretty rank  and next
you've got the full day  and everything smiling in the sun  and the
song-birds just going it!

a little smoke couldn't be noticed now  so we would take some fish off of
the lines and cook up a hot breakfast   and afterwards we would watch the
lonesomeness of the river  and kind of lazy along  and by and by lazy off
to sleep   wake up by and by  and look to see what done it  and maybe see
a steamboat coughing along up-stream  so far off towards the other side
you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or
side-wheel  then for about an hour there wouldn't be nothing to hear nor
nothing to see just solid lonesomeness   next you'd see a raft sliding
by  away off yonder  and maybe a galoot on it chopping  because they're
most always doing it on a raft  you'd see the axe flash and come down
 you don't hear nothing  you see that axe go up again  and by the time
it's above the man's head then you hear the k'chunk! it had took all
that time to come over the water   so we would put in the day  lazying
around  listening to the stillness   once there was a thick fog  and the
rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats
wouldn't run over them   a scow or a raft went by so close we could hear
them talking and cussing and laughing heard them plain  but we couldn't
see no sign of them  it made you feel crawly  it was like spirits
carrying on that way in the air   jim said he believed it was spirits 
but i says 

 no  spirits wouldn't say  'dern the dern fog ' 

soon as it was night out we shoved  when we got her out to about the
middle we let her alone  and let her float wherever the current wanted
her to  then we lit the pipes  and dangled our legs in the water  and
talked about all kinds of things we was always naked  day and night 
whenever the mosquitoes would let us the new clothes buck's folks made
for me was too good to be comfortable  and besides i didn't go much on
clothes  nohow 

sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest
time  yonder was the banks and the islands  across the water  and maybe a
spark which was a candle in a cabin window  and sometimes on the water
you could see a spark or two on a raft or a scow  you know  and maybe
you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts 
it's lovely to live on a raft   we had the sky up there  all speckled
with stars  and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them  and
discuss about whether they was made or only just happened   jim he
allowed they was made  but i allowed they happened  i judged it would
have took too long to make so many   jim said the moon could a laid them 
well  that looked kind of reasonable  so i didn't say nothing against it 
because i've seen a frog lay most as many  so of course it could be done 
we used to watch the stars that fell  too  and see them streak down   jim
allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest 

once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the
dark  and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of
her chimbleys  and they would rain down in the river and look awful
pretty  then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and
her powwow shut off and leave the river still again  and by and by her
waves would get to us  a long time after she was gone  and joggle the
raft a bit  and after that you wouldn't hear nothing for you couldn't
tell how long  except maybe frogs or something 

after midnight the people on shore went to bed  and then for two or three
hours the shores was black no more sparks in the cabin windows   these
sparks was our clock the first one that showed again meant morning was
coming  so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away 

one morning about daybreak i found a canoe and crossed over a chute to
the main shore it was only two hundred yards and paddled about a mile
up a crick amongst the cypress woods  to see if i couldn't get some
berries  just as i was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed
the crick  here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as
they could foot it   i thought i was a goner  for whenever anybody was
after anybody i judged it was me or maybe jim   i was about to dig out
from there in a hurry  but they was pretty close to me then  and sung out
and begged me to save their lives said they hadn't been doing nothing 
and was being chased for it said there was men and dogs a-coming   they
wanted to jump right in  but i says 

 don't you do it   i don't hear the dogs and horses yet  you've got time
to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways  then you
take to the water and wade down to me and get in that'll throw the dogs
off the scent  

they done it  and soon as they was aboard i lit out for our towhead  and
in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off 
shouting  we heard them come along towards the crick  but couldn't see
them  they seemed to stop and fool around a while  then  as we got
further and further away all the time  we couldn't hardly hear them at
all  by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the
river  everything was quiet  and we paddled over to the towhead and hid
in the cottonwoods and was safe 

one of these fellows was about seventy or upwards  and had a bald head
and very gray whiskers   he had an old battered-up slouch hat on  and a
greasy blue woollen shirt  and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed
into his boot-tops  and home-knit galluses no  he only had one   he had
an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over
his arm  and both of them had big  fat  ratty-looking carpet-bags 

the other fellow was about thirty  and dressed about as ornery   after
breakfast we all laid off and talked  and the first thing that come out
was that these chaps didn't know one another 

 what got you into trouble   says the baldhead to t'other chap 

 well  i'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth and
it does take it off  too  and generly the enamel along with it but i
stayed about one night longer than i ought to  and was just in the act of
sliding out when i ran across you on the trail this side of town  and you
told me they were coming  and begged me to help you to get off   so i
told you i was expecting trouble myself  and would scatter out with you 
that's the whole yarn what's yourn 

 well  i'd ben a-running' a little temperance revival thar 'bout a week 
and was the pet of the women folks  big and little  for i was makin' it
mighty warm for the rummies  i tell you  and takin' as much as five or
six dollars a night ten cents a head  children and niggers free and
business a-growin' all the time  when somehow or another a little report
got around last night that i had a way of puttin' in my time with a
private jug on the sly   a nigger rousted me out this mornin'  and told
me the people was getherin' on the quiet with their dogs and horses  and
they'd be along pretty soon and give me 'bout half an hour's start  and
then run me down if they could  and if they got me they'd tar and feather
me and ride me on a rail  sure   i didn't wait for no breakfast i warn't
hungry  

 old man   said the young one   i reckon we might double-team it
together  what do you think  

 i ain't undisposed   what's your line mainly  

 jour printer by trade  do a little in patent medicines  theater-actor
 tragedy  you know  take a turn to mesmerism and phrenology when there's a
chance  teach singing-geography school for a change  sling a lecture
sometimes oh  i do lots of things most anything that comes handy  so it
ain't work   what's your lay  

 i've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time   layin' on o'
hands is my best holt for cancer and paralysis  and sich things  and i
k'n tell a fortune pretty good when i've got somebody along to find out
the facts for me   preachin's my line  too  and workin' camp-meetin's 
and missionaryin' around  

nobody never said anything for a while  then the young man hove a sigh
and says 

 alas! 

 what 're you alassin' about   says the bald-head 

 to think i should have lived to be leading such a life  and be degraded
down into such company    and he begun to wipe the corner of his eye with
a rag 

 dern your skin  ain't the company good enough for you   says the
baldhead  pretty pert and uppish 

 yes  it is good enough for me  it's as good as i deserve  for who
fetched me so low when i was so high   i did myself   i don't blame you 
gentlemen far from it  i don't blame anybody   i deserve it all   let
the cold world do its worst  one thing i know there's a grave somewhere
for me  the world may go on just as it's always done  and take everything
from me loved ones  property  everything  but it can't take that 
some day i'll lie down in it and forget it all  and my poor broken heart
will be at rest    he went on a-wiping 

 drot your pore broken heart   says the baldhead   what are you heaving
your pore broken heart at us f'r   we hain't done nothing  

 no  i know you haven't   i ain't blaming you  gentlemen   i brought
myself down yes  i did it myself   it's right i should suffer perfectly
right i don't make any moan  

 brought you down from whar   whar was you brought down from  

 ah  you would not believe me  the world never believes let it pass
 'tis no matter   the secret of my birth  

 the secret of your birth!  do you mean to say  

 gentlemen   says the young man  very solemn   i will reveal it to you 
for i feel i may have confidence in you   by rights i am a duke! 

jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that  and i reckon mine did  too 
then the baldhead says    no! you can't mean it  

 yes   my great-grandfather  eldest son of the duke of bridgewater  fled
to this country about the end of the last century  to breathe the pure
air of freedom  married here  and died  leaving a son  his own father
dying about the same time   the second son of the late duke seized the
titles and estates the infant real duke was ignored   i am the lineal
descendant of that infant i am the rightful duke of bridgewater  and
here am i  forlorn  torn from my high estate  hunted of men  despised by
the cold world  ragged  worn  heart-broken  and degraded to the
companionship of felons on a raft! 

jim pitied him ever so much  and so did i  we tried to comfort him  but
he said it warn't much use  he couldn't be much comforted  said if we was
a mind to acknowledge him  that would do him more good than most anything
else  so we said we would  if he would tell us how   he said we ought to
bow when we spoke to him  and say  your grace   or  my lord   or  your
lordship  and he wouldn't mind it if we called him plain
 bridgewater   which  he said  was a title anyway  and not a name  and
one of us ought to wait on him at dinner  and do any little thing for him
he wanted done 

well  that was all easy  so we done it   all through dinner jim stood
around and waited on him  and says   will yo' grace have some o' dis or
some o' dat   and so on  and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to
him 

but the old man got pretty silent by and by didn't have much to say  and
didn't look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on
around that duke   he seemed to have something on his mind   so  along in
the afternoon  he says 

 looky here  bilgewater   he says   i'm nation sorry for you  but you
ain't the only person that's had troubles like that  

 no  

 no you ain't   you ain't the only person that's ben snaked down
wrongfully out'n a high place  

 alas! 

 no  you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his birth    and 
by jings  he begins to cry 

 hold!  what do you mean  

 bilgewater  kin i trust you   says the old man  still sort of sobbing 

 to the bitter death!   he took the old man by the hand and squeezed it 
and says   that secret of your being   speak! 

 bilgewater  i am the late dauphin! 

you bet you  jim and me stared this time   then the duke says 

 you are what  

 yes  my friend  it is too true your eyes is lookin' at this very moment
on the pore disappeared dauphin  looy the seventeen  son of looy the
sixteen and marry antonette  

 you!  at your age!  no!  you mean you're the late charlemagne  you must
be six or seven hundred years old  at the very least  

 trouble has done it  bilgewater  trouble has done it  trouble has brung
these gray hairs and this premature balditude   yes  gentlemen  you see
before you  in blue jeans and misery  the wanderin'  exiled  trampled-on 
and sufferin' rightful king of france  

well  he cried and took on so that me and jim didn't know hardly what to
do  we was so sorry and so glad and proud we'd got him with us  too   so
we set in  like we done before with the duke  and tried to comfort him 
but he said it warn't no use  nothing but to be dead and done with it all
could do him any good  though he said it often made him feel easier and
better for a while if people treated him according to his rights  and got
down on one knee to speak to him  and always called him  your majesty  
and waited on him first at meals  and didn't set down in his presence
till he asked them  so jim and me set to majestying him  and doing this
and that and t'other for him  and standing up till he told us we might
set down   this done him heaps of good  and so he got cheerful and
comfortable   but the duke kind of soured on him  and didn't look a bit
satisfied with the way things was going  still  the king acted real
friendly towards him  and said the duke's great-grandfather and all the
other dukes of bilgewater was a good deal thought of by his father  and
was allowed to come to the palace considerable  but the duke stayed huffy
a good while  till by and by the king says 

 like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer raft 
bilgewater  and so what's the use o' your bein' sour   it 'll only make
things oncomfortable   it ain't my fault i warn't born a duke  it ain't
your fault you warn't born a king so what's the use to worry   make the
best o' things the way you find 'em  says i that's my motto   this ain't
no bad thing that we've struck here plenty grub and an easy life come 
give us your hand  duke  and le's all be friends  

the duke done it  and jim and me was pretty glad to see it   it took away
all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it  because it
would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the raft 
for what you want  above all things  on a raft  is for everybody to be
satisfied  and feel right and kind towards the others 

it didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn't no
kings nor dukes at all  but just low-down humbugs and frauds   but i
never said nothing  never let on  kept it to myself  it's the best way 
then you don't have no quarrels  and don't get into no trouble   if they
wanted us to call them kings and dukes  i hadn't no objections  'long as
it would keep peace in the family  and it warn't no use to tell jim  so i
didn't tell him   if i never learnt nothing else out of pap  i learnt
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them
have their own way 




they asked us considerable many questions  wanted to know what we covered
up the raft that way for  and laid by in the daytime instead of running
 was jim a runaway nigger   says i 

 goodness sakes! would a runaway nigger run south  

no  they allowed he wouldn't   i had to account for things some way  so i
says 

 my folks was living in pike county  in missouri  where i was born  and
they all died off but me and pa and my brother ike   pa  he 'lowed he'd
break up and go down and live with uncle ben  who's got a little
one-horse place on the river  forty-four mile below orleans   pa was
pretty poor  and had some debts  so when he'd squared up there warn't
nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger  jim   that warn't enough
to take us fourteen hundred mile  deck passage nor no other way   well 
when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day  he ketched this
piece of a raft  so we reckoned we'd go down to orleans on it   pa's luck
didn't hold out  a steamboat run over the forrard corner of the raft one
night  and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel  jim and me
come up all right  but pa was drunk  and ike was only four years old  so
they never come up no more   well  for the next day or two we had
considerable trouble  because people was always coming out in skiffs and
trying to take jim away from me  saying they believed he was a runaway
nigger   we don't run daytimes no more now  nights they don't bother us  

the duke says 

 leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we
want to   i'll think the thing over i'll invent a plan that'll fix it 
we'll let it alone for to-day  because of course we don't want to go by
that town yonder in daylight it mightn't be healthy  

towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain  the heat
lightning was squirting around low down in the sky  and the leaves was
beginning to shiver it was going to be pretty ugly  it was easy to see
that   so the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam  to see
what the beds was like   my bed was a straw tick better than jim's  which
was a corn-shuck tick  there's always cobs around about in a shuck tick 
and they poke into you and hurt  and when you roll over the dry shucks
sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves  it makes such a
rustling that you wake up   well  the duke allowed he would take my bed 
but the king allowed he wouldn't   he says 

 i should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that
a corn-shuck bed warn't just fitten for me to sleep on   your grace 'll
take the shuck bed yourself  

jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute  being afraid there was
going to be some more trouble amongst them  so we was pretty glad when
the duke says 

 'tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of
oppression   misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit  i yield  i
submit  'tis my fate   i am alone in the world let me suffer  can bear
it  

we got away as soon as it was good and dark   the king told us to stand
well out towards the middle of the river  and not show a light till we
got a long ways below the town   we come in sight of the little bunch of
lights by and by that was the town  you know and slid by  about a half
a mile out  all right   when we was three-quarters of a mile below we
hoisted up our signal lantern  and about ten o'clock it come on to rain
and blow and thunder and lighten like everything  so the king told us to
both stay on watch till the weather got better  then him and the duke
crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night   it was my watch
below till twelve  but i wouldn't a turned in anyway if i'd had a bed 
because a body don't see such a storm as that every day in the week  not
by a long sight   my souls  how the wind did scream along!  and every
second or two there'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half
a mile around  and you'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain 
and the trees thrashing around in the wind  then comes a h-whack! bum!
bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum and the thunder would go rumbling
and grumbling away  and quit and then rip comes another flash and
another sockdolager   the waves most washed me off the raft sometimes 
but i hadn't any clothes on  and didn't mind   we didn't have no trouble
about snags  the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant
that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or
that and miss them 

i had the middle watch  you know  but i was pretty sleepy by that time 
so jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me  he was always
mighty good that way  jim was   i crawled into the wigwam  but the king
and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn't no show for
me  so i laid outside i didn't mind the rain  because it was warm  and
the waves warn't running so high now   about two they come up again 
though  and jim was going to call me  but he changed his mind  because he
reckoned they warn't high enough yet to do any harm  but he was mistaken
about that  for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a regular ripper
and washed me overboard   it most killed jim a-laughing   he was the
easiest nigger to laugh that ever was  anyway 

i took the watch  and jim he laid down and snored away  and by and by the
storm let up for good and all  and the first cabin-light that showed i
rousted him out  and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the day 

the king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast  and him and
the duke played seven-up a while  five cents a game   then they got tired
of it  and allowed they would  lay out a campaign   as they called it 
the duke went down into his carpet-bag  and fetched up a lot of little
printed bills and read them out loud   one bill said   the celebrated dr 
armand de montalban  of paris   would  lecture on the science of
phrenology  at such and such a place  on the blank day of blank  at ten
cents admission  and  furnish charts of character at twenty-five cents
apiece    the duke said that was him   in another bill he was the
 world-renowned shakespearian tragedian  garrick the younger  of drury
lane  london    in other bills he had a lot of other names and done other
wonderful things  like finding water and gold with a  divining-rod  
 dissipating witch spells   and so on   by and by he says 

 but the histrionic muse is the darling   have you ever trod the boards 
royalty  

 no   says the king 

 you shall  then  before you're three days older  fallen grandeur   says
the duke    the first good town we come to we'll hire a hall and do the
sword fight in richard iii  and the balcony scene in romeo and juliet 
how does that strike you  

 i'm in  up to the hub  for anything that will pay  bilgewater  but  you
see  i don't know nothing about play-actin'  and hain't ever seen much of
it   i was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace   do you
reckon you can learn me  

 easy! 

 all right   i'm jist a-freezn' for something fresh  anyway   le's
commence right away  

so the duke he told him all about who romeo was and who juliet was  and
said he was used to being romeo  so the king could be juliet 

 but if juliet's such a young gal  duke  my peeled head and my white
whiskers is goin' to look oncommon odd on her  maybe  

 no  don't you worry  these country jakes won't ever think of that 
besides  you know  you'll be in costume  and that makes all the
difference in the world  juliet's in a balcony  enjoying the moonlight
before she goes to bed  and she's got on her night-gown and her ruffled
nightcap   here are the costumes for the parts  

he got out two or three curtain-calico suits  which he said was meedyevil
armor for richard iii  and t'other chap  and a long white cotton
nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match   the king was satisfied  so
the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the most splendid
spread-eagle way  prancing around and acting at the same time  to show
how it had got to be done  then he give the book to the king and told him
to get his part by heart 

there was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend  and
after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run
in daylight without it being dangersome for jim  so he allowed he would
go down to the town and fix that thing   the king allowed he would go 
too  and see if he couldn't strike something   we was out of coffee  so
jim said i better go along with them in the canoe and get some 

when we got there there warn't nobody stirring  streets empty  and
perfectly dead and still  like sunday   we found a sick nigger sunning
himself in a back yard  and he said everybody that warn't too young or
too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting  about two mile back in the
woods   the king got the directions  and allowed he'd go and work that
camp-meeting for all it was worth  and i might go  too 

the duke said what he was after was a printing-office   we found it  a
little bit of a concern  up over a carpenter shop carpenters and
printers all gone to the meeting  and no doors locked   it was a dirty 
littered-up place  and had ink marks  and handbills with pictures of
horses and runaway niggers on them  all over the walls   the duke shed
his coat and said he was all right now   so me and the king lit out for
the camp-meeting 

we got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping  for it was a most
awful hot day   there was as much as a thousand people there from twenty
mile around   the woods was full of teams and wagons  hitched
everywheres  feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off
the flies   there was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with
branches  where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell  and piles of
watermelons and green corn and such-like truck 

the preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds  only they was
bigger and held crowds of people   the benches was made out of outside
slabs of logs  with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into
for legs  they didn't have no backs   the preachers had high platforms to
stand on at one end of the sheds   the women had on sun-bonnets  and some
had linsey-woolsey frocks  some gingham ones  and a few of the young ones
had on calico   some of the young men was barefooted  and some of the
children didn't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt   some of
the old women was knitting  and some of the young folks was courting on
the sly 

the first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn   he lined
out two lines  everybody sung it  and it was kind of grand to hear it 
there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way  then he
lined out two more for them to sing and so on   the people woke up more
and more  and sung louder and louder  and towards the end some begun to
groan  and some begun to shout   then the preacher begun to preach  and
begun in earnest  too  and went weaving first to one side of the platform
and then the other  and then a-leaning down over the front of it  with
his arms and his body going all the time  and shouting his words out with
all his might  and every now and then he would hold up his bible and
spread it open  and kind of pass it around this way and that  shouting 
 it's the brazen serpent in the wilderness!  look upon it and live!   and
people would shout out   glory! a-a-men!   and so he went on  and the
people groaning and crying and saying amen 

 oh  come to the mourners' bench! come  black with sin! (amen!) come 
sick and sore! (amen!) come  lame and halt and blind! (amen!) come  pore
and needy  sunk in shame! (a-a-men!) come  all that's worn and soiled and
suffering! come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite heart! come
in your rags and sin and dirt! the waters that cleanse is free  the door
of heaven stands open oh  enter in and be at rest!  (a-a-men!  glory 
glory hallelujah!)

and so on   you couldn't make out what the preacher said any more  on
account of the shouting and crying   folks got up everywheres in the
crowd  and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners' bench 
with the tears running down their faces  and when all the mourners had
got up there to the front benches in a crowd  they sung and shouted and
flung themselves down on the straw  just crazy and wild 

well  the first i knowed the king got a-going  and you could hear him
over everybody  and next he went a-charging up on to the platform  and
the preacher he begged him to speak to the people  and he done it   he
told them he was a pirate been a pirate for thirty years out in the
indian ocean and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in
a fight  and he was home now to take out some fresh men  and thanks to
goodness he'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat
without a cent  and he was glad of it  it was the blessedest thing that
ever happened to him  because he was a changed man now  and happy for the
first time in his life  and  poor as he was  he was going to start right
off and work his way back to the indian ocean  and put in the rest of his
life trying to turn the pirates into the true path  for he could do it
better than anybody else  being acquainted with all pirate crews in that
ocean  and though it would take him a long time to get there without
money  he would get there anyway  and every time he convinced a pirate he
would say to him   don't you thank me  don't you give me no credit  it
all belongs to them dear people in pokeville camp-meeting  natural
brothers and benefactors of the race  and that dear preacher there  the
truest friend a pirate ever had! 

and then he busted into tears  and so did everybody   then somebody sings
out   take up a collection for him  take up a collection!   well  a half
a dozen made a jump to do it  but somebody sings out   let him pass the
hat around!   then everybody said it  the preacher too 

so the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes 
and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so
good to the poor pirates away off there  and every little while the
prettiest kind of girls  with the tears running down their cheeks  would
up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by  and he
always done it  and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or
six times and he was invited to stay a week  and everybody wanted him to
live in their houses  and said they'd think it was an honor  but he said
as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he couldn't do no good  and
besides he was in a sweat to get to the indian ocean right off and go to
work on the pirates 

when we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had
collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents   and then he had
fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky  too  that he found under a
wagon when he was starting home through the woods   the king said  take
it all around  it laid over any day he'd ever put in in the missionarying
line   he said it warn't no use talking  heathens don't amount to shucks
alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with 

the duke was thinking he'd been doing pretty well till the king come to
show up  but after that he didn't think so so much   he had set up and
printed off two little jobs for farmers in that printing-office horse
bills and took the money  four dollars   and he had got in ten
dollars' worth of advertisements for the paper  which he said he would
put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance so they done it 
the price of the paper was two dollars a year  but he took in three
subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him in
advance  they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual  but he
said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the price as low as
he could afford it  and was going to run it for cash   he set up a little
piece of poetry  which he made  himself  out of his own head three
verses kind of sweet and saddish the name of it was   yes  crush  cold
world  this breaking heart  and he left that all set up and ready to
print in the paper  and didn't charge nothing for it   well  he took in
nine dollars and a half  and said he'd done a pretty square day's work
for it 

then he showed us another little job he'd printed and hadn't charged for 
because it was for us   it had a picture of a runaway nigger with a
bundle on a stick over his shoulder  and  $200 reward  under it   the
reading was all about jim  and just described him to a dot   it said he
run away from st  jacques' plantation  forty mile below new orleans  last
winter  and likely went north  and whoever would catch him and send him
back he could have the reward and expenses 

 now   says the duke   after to-night we can run in the daytime if we
want to   whenever we see anybody coming we can tie jim hand and foot
with a rope  and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we
captured him up the river  and were too poor to travel on a steamboat  so
we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to
get the reward   handcuffs and chains would look still better on jim  but
it wouldn't go well with the story of us being so poor   too much like
jewelry   ropes are the correct thing we must preserve the unities  as
we say on the boards  

we all said the duke was pretty smart  and there couldn't be no trouble
about running daytimes   we judged we could make miles enough that night
to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke's work in the
printing office was going to make in that little town  then we could boom
right along if we wanted to 

we laid low and kept still  and never shoved out till nearly ten o'clock 
then we slid by  pretty wide away from the town  and didn't hoist our
lantern till we was clear out of sight of it 

when jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning  he says 

 huck  does you reck'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo' kings on dis trip  

 no   i says   i reckon not  

 well   says he   dat's all right  den   i doan' mine one er two kings 
but dat's enough   dis one's powerful drunk  en de duke ain' much
better  

i found jim had been trying to get him to talk french  so he could hear
what it was like  but he said he had been in this country so long  and
had so much trouble  he'd forgot it 




it was after sun-up now  but we went right on and didn't tie up   the
king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty  but after
they'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal 
after breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft  and
pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches  and let his legs dangle
in the water  so as to be comfortable  and lit his pipe  and went to
getting his romeo and juliet by heart   when he had got it pretty good
him and the duke begun to practice it together   the duke had to learn
him over and over again how to say every speech  and he made him sigh 
and put his hand on his heart  and after a while he said he done it
pretty well   only   he says   you mustn't bellow out romeo! that way 
like a bull you must say it soft and sick and languishy  so r-o-o-meo!
that is the idea  for juliet's a dear sweet mere child of a girl  you
know  and she doesn't bray like a jackass  

well  next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of
oak laths  and begun to practice the sword fight the duke called himself
richard iii   and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was
grand to see   but by and by the king tripped and fell overboard  and
after that they took a rest  and had a talk about all kinds of adventures
they'd had in other times along the river 

after dinner the duke says 

 well  capet  we'll want to make this a first-class show  you know  so i
guess we'll add a little more to it   we want a little something to
answer encores with  anyway  

 what's onkores  bilgewater  

the duke told him  and then says 

 i'll answer by doing the highland fling or the sailor's hornpipe  and
you well  let me see oh  i've got it you can do hamlet's soliloquy  

 hamlet's which  

 hamlet's soliloquy  you know  the most celebrated thing in shakespeare 
ah  it's sublime  sublime!  always fetches the house   i haven't got it
in the book i've only got one volume but i reckon i can piece it out
from memory   i'll just walk up and down a minute  and see if i can call
it back from recollection's vaults  

so he went to marching up and down  thinking  and frowning horrible every
now and then  then he would hoist up his eyebrows  next he would squeeze
his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan  next he would
sigh  and next he'd let on to drop a tear   it was beautiful to see him 
by and by he got it   he told us to give attention   then he strikes a
most noble attitude  with one leg shoved forwards  and his arms stretched
away up  and his head tilted back  looking up at the sky  and then he
begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth  and after that  all through
his speech  he howled  and spread around  and swelled up his chest  and
just knocked the spots out of any acting ever i see before   this is the
speech i learned it  easy enough  while he was learning it to the king 

to be  or not to be  that is the bare bodkin that makes calamity of so
long life  for who would fardels bear  till birnam wood do come to
dunsinane  but that the fear of something after death murders the
innocent sleep  great nature's second course  and makes us rather sling
the arrows of outrageous fortune than fly to others that we know not of 
there's the respect must give us pause  wake duncan with thy knocking!  i
would thou couldst  for who would bear the whips and scorns of time  the
oppressor's wrong  the proud man's contumely  the law's delay  and the
quietus which his pangs might take  in the dead waste and middle of the
night  when churchyards yawn in customary suits of solemn black  but that
the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns  breathes
forth contagion on the world  and thus the native hue of resolution  like
the poor cat i' the adage  is sicklied o'er with care  and all the clouds
that lowered o'er our housetops  with this regard their currents turn
awry  and lose the name of action  'tis a consummation devoutly to be
wished   but soft you  the fair ophelia  ope not thy ponderous and marble
jaws  but get thee to a nunnery go!

well  the old man he liked that speech  and he mighty soon got it so he
could do it first-rate   it seemed like he was just born for it  and when
he had his hand in and was excited  it was perfectly lovely the way he
would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off 

the first chance we got the duke he had some showbills printed  and after
that  for two or three days as we floated along  the raft was a most
uncommon lively place  for there warn't nothing but sword fighting and
rehearsing as the duke called it going on all the time   one morning 
when we was pretty well down the state of arkansaw  we come in sight of a
little one-horse town in a big bend  so we tied up about three-quarters
of a mile above it  in the mouth of a crick which was shut in like a
tunnel by the cypress trees  and all of us but jim took the canoe and
went down there to see if there was any chance in that place for our
show 

we struck it mighty lucky  there was going to be a circus there that
afternoon  and the country people was already beginning to come in  in
all kinds of old shackly wagons  and on horses   the circus would leave
before night  so our show would have a pretty good chance   the duke he
hired the courthouse  and we went around and stuck up our bills   they
read like this 

shaksperean revival ! ! !
wonderful attraction!
for one night only!

the world renowned tragedians  david garrick the younger  of drury lane
theatre london  and edmund kean the elder  of the royal haymarket
theatre  whitechapel  pudding lane  piccadilly  london  and the royal
continental theatres  in their sublime shaksperean spectacle entitled

the balcony scene in romeo and juliet ! ! !

romeo                   mr  garrick
juliet                  mr  kean

assisted by the whole strength of the company!
new costumes  new scenes  new appointments!
also  the thrilling  masterly  and blood-curdling
broad-sword conflict in richard iii  ! ! !

richard iii             mr  garrick
richmond                mr  kean

also  (by special request) hamlet's immortal soliloquy ! !
by the illustrious kean! done by him 300 consecutive nights in paris!
for one night only  on account of imperative european engagements!
admission 25 cents  children and servants  10 cents 

then we went loafing around town   the stores and houses was most all
old  shackly  dried up frame concerns that hadn't ever been painted  they
was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts  so as to be out of
reach of the water when the river was over-flowed   the houses had little
gardens around them  but they didn't seem to raise hardly anything in
them but jimpson-weeds  and sunflowers  and ash piles  and old curled-up
boots and shoes  and pieces of bottles  and rags  and played-out tinware 
the fences was made of different kinds of boards  nailed on at different
times  and they leaned every which way  and had gates that didn't generly
have but one hinge a leather one   some of the fences had been
white-washed some time or another  but the duke said it was in clumbus'
time  like enough   there was generly hogs in the garden  and people
driving them out 

all the stores was along one street   they had white domestic awnings in
front  and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts 
there was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings  and loafers roosting on
them all day long  whittling them with their barlow knives  and chawing
tobacco  and gaping and yawning and stretching a mighty ornery lot 
they generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella  but
didn't wear no coats nor waistcoats  they called one another bill  and
buck  and hank  and joe  and andy  and talked lazy and drawly  and used
considerable many cuss words   there was as many as one loafer leaning up
against every awning-post  and he most always had his hands in his
britches-pockets  except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw of
tobacco or scratch   what a body was hearing amongst them all the time
was 

 gimme a chaw 'v tobacker  hank  

 cain't  i hain't got but one chaw left   ask bill  

maybe bill he gives him a chaw  maybe he lies and says he ain't got none 
some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world  nor a chaw
of tobacco of their own   they get all their chawing by borrowing  they
say to a fellow   i wisht you'd len' me a chaw  jack  i jist this minute
give ben thompson the last chaw i had  which is a lie pretty much
everytime  it don't fool nobody but a stranger  but jack ain't no
stranger  so he says 

 you give him a chaw  did you   so did your sister's cat's grandmother 
you pay me back the chaws you've awready borry'd off'n me  lafe buckner 
then i'll loan you one or two ton of it  and won't charge you no back
intrust  nuther  

 well  i did pay you back some of it wunst  

 yes  you did 'bout six chaws   you borry'd store tobacker and paid back
nigger-head  

store tobacco is flat black plug  but these fellows mostly chaws the
natural leaf twisted   when they borrow a chaw they don't generly cut it
off with a knife  but set the plug in between their teeth  and gnaw with
their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two 
then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it when
it's handed back  and says  sarcastic 

 here  gimme the chaw  and you take the plug  

all the streets and lanes was just mud  they warn't nothing else but mud
 mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places  and two
or three inches deep in all the places   the hogs loafed and grunted
around everywheres   you'd see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come
lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the way  where
folks had to walk around her  and she'd stretch out and shut her eyes and
wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her  and look as happy as if
she was on salary  and pretty soon you'd hear a loafer sing out   hi!  so
boy! sick him  tige!  and away the sow would go  squealing most horrible 
with a dog or two swinging to each ear  and three or four dozen more
a-coming  and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the thing
out of sight  and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the noise   then
they'd settle back again till there was a dog fight   there couldn't
anything wake them up all over  and make them happy all over  like a dog
fight unless it might be putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting
fire to him  or tying a tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to
death 

on the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank  and
they was bowed and bent  and about ready to tumble in  the people had
moved out of them   the bank was caved away under one corner of some
others  and that corner was hanging over   people lived in them yet  but
it was dangersome  because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house
caves in at a time   sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep
will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the
river in one summer  such a town as that has to be always moving back 
and back  and back  because the river's always gnawing at it 

the nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the wagons
and horses in the streets  and more coming all the time   families
fetched their dinners with them from the country  and eat them in the
wagons   there was considerable whisky drinking going on  and i seen
three fights   by and by somebody sings out 

 here comes old boggs! in from the country for his little old monthly
drunk  here he comes  boys! 

all the loafers looked glad  i reckoned they was used to having fun out
of boggs   one of them says 

 wonder who he's a-gwyne to chaw up this time   if he'd a-chawed up all
the men he's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he'd have
considerable ruputation now  

another one says   i wisht old boggs 'd threaten me  'cuz then i'd know i
warn't gwyne to die for a thousan' year  

boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse  whooping and yelling like an
injun  and singing out 

 cler the track  thar   i'm on the waw-path  and the price uv coffins is
a-gwyne to raise  

he was drunk  and weaving about in his saddle  he was over fifty year
old  and had a very red face   everybody yelled at him and laughed at him
and sassed him  and he sassed back  and said he'd attend to them and lay
them out in their regular turns  but he couldn't wait now because he'd
come to town to kill old colonel sherburn  and his motto was   meat
first  and spoon vittles to top off on  

he see me  and rode up and says 

 whar'd you come f'm  boy   you prepared to die  

then he rode on   i was scared  but a man says 

 he don't mean nothing  he's always a-carryin' on like that when he's
drunk   he's the best naturedest old fool in arkansaw never hurt nobody 
drunk nor sober  

boggs rode up before the biggest store in town  and bent his head down so
he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells 

 come out here  sherburn! come out and meet the man you've swindled 
you're the houn' i'm after  and i'm a-gwyne to have you  too! 

and so he went on  calling sherburn everything he could lay his tongue
to  and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and
going on   by and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five and he was a
heap the best dressed man in that town  too steps out of the store  and
the crowd drops back on each side to let him come   he says to boggs 
mighty ca'm and slow he says 

 i'm tired of this  but i'll endure it till one o'clock   till one
o'clock  mind no longer   if you open your mouth against me only once
after that time you can't travel so far but i will find you  

then he turns and goes in   the crowd looked mighty sober  nobody
stirred  and there warn't no more laughing   boggs rode off blackguarding
sherburn as loud as he could yell  all down the street  and pretty soon
back he comes and stops before the store  still keeping it up   some men
crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up  but he wouldn't  they
told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes  and so he must
go home he must go right away   but it didn't do no good   he cussed
away with all his might  and throwed his hat down in the mud and rode
over it  and pretty soon away he went a-raging down the street again 
with his gray hair a-flying  everybody that could get a chance at him
tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him up
and get him sober  but it warn't no use up the street he would tear
again  and give sherburn another cussing   by and by somebody says 

 go for his daughter! quick  go for his daughter  sometimes he'll listen
to her   if anybody can persuade him  she can  

so somebody started on a run   i walked down street a ways and stopped 
in about five or ten minutes here comes boggs again  but not on his
horse   he was a-reeling across the street towards me  bare-headed  with
a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along 
he was quiet  and looked uneasy  and he warn't hanging back any  but was
doing some of the hurrying himself   somebody sings out 

 boggs! 

i looked over there to see who said it  and it was that colonel sherburn 
he was standing perfectly still in the street  and had a pistol raised in
his right hand not aiming it  but holding it out with the barrel tilted
up towards the sky   the same second i see a young girl coming on the
run  and two men with her   boggs and the men turned round to see who
called him  and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side  and
the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to a level both barrels
cocked  boggs throws up both of his hands and says   o lord  don't
shoot!   bang! goes the first shot  and he staggers back  clawing at the
air bang! goes the second one  and he tumbles backwards on to the
ground  heavy and solid  with his arms spread out   that young girl
screamed out and comes rushing  and down she throws herself on her
father  crying  and saying   oh  he's killed him  he's killed him!   the
crowd closed up around them  and shouldered and jammed one another  with
their necks stretched  trying to see  and people on the inside trying to
shove them back and shouting   back  back! give him air  give him air! 

colonel sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground  and turned around
on his heels and walked off 

they took boggs to a little drug store  the crowd pressing around just
the same  and the whole town following  and i rushed and got a good place
at the window  where i was close to him and could see in   they laid him
on the floor and put one large bible under his head  and opened another
one and spread it on his breast  but they tore open his shirt first  and
i seen where one of the bullets went in   he made about a dozen long
gasps  his breast lifting the bible up when he drawed in his breath  and
letting it down again when he breathed it out and after that he laid
still  he was dead   then they pulled his daughter away from him 
screaming and crying  and took her off   she was about sixteen  and very
sweet and gentle looking  but awful pale and scared 

well  pretty soon the whole town was there  squirming and scrouging and
pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look  but people that
had the places wouldn't give them up  and folks behind them was saying
all the time   say  now  you've looked enough  you fellows  'tain't right
and 'tain't fair for you to stay thar all the time  and never give nobody
a chance  other folks has their rights as well as you  

there was considerable jawing back  so i slid out  thinking maybe there
was going to be trouble   the streets was full  and everybody was
excited  everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened 
and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows 
stretching their necks and listening   one long  lanky man  with long
hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head  and a
crooked-handled cane  marked out the places on the ground where boggs
stood and where sherburn stood  and the people following him around from
one place to t'other and watching everything he done  and bobbing their
heads to show they understood  and stooping a little and resting their
hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with his
cane  and then he stood up straight and stiff where sherburn had stood 
frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes  and sung out 
 boggs!  and then fetched his cane down slow to a level  and says  bang! 
staggered backwards  says  bang!  again  and fell down flat on his back 
the people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect  said it was
just exactly the way it all happened   then as much as a dozen people got
out their bottles and treated him 

well  by and by somebody said sherburn ought to be lynched   in about a
minute everybody was saying it  so away they went  mad and yelling  and
snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with 




they swarmed up towards sherburn's house  a-whooping and raging like
injuns  and everything had to clear the way or get run over